---
title: "Filled Containers, Felt Communities. Facts and Constructivism in Regional Museums"
authors: [{name:"Markus Walz", institution:""}]
---

The metaphor "container" belongs to the criticism that regional cultural
studies misjudge topographies as the exact space of a culture, a
homogeneous ethnic group. The "archipelagos of cultures" is a comparable
metaphor; the waterway between the islands indicates the idea of good
selectivity. Migration history underpins this criticism. Diachronic
population studies clearly show that European towns only persisted by
immigration: During the 14^th^ and 15^th^ centuries, 80 percent of all
known surnames of inhabitants of Périgueux---a town in southwestern
France---vanished within less than fifty years, most of them within less
than twenty years (Poussou, 1994, p. 30). A thousand surnames were
registered between 1550 and 1720 in the town Weißenburg (Franconia,
Germany); only twenty of them existed during the whole period
(Blendinger, 1940). This method cannot account for matrilinear
relationships, but nevertheless, the results are obvious.

Refugees, exiles, expelled and displaced persons were elements for an
organised re-filling of emptied "containers". Origin and destination
could be classified as "homogeneous" or "multicultural containers"; the
results oscillate between a multicultural "remix"---e. g. the Polish and
German population of Silesia---and an enforced homogeneity---e. g. Crete
as an island with Greek inhabitants only. Refugees out of Iraq arrived
in Europe and outside of traditional "containers", they discovered
themselves as Assyrians.

Immigration is crossed by social stratigraphy, as Moritz Csáky (2000, p.
32--34) explained with Vienna and Budapest around 1900: Less than 40
percent of the population was born there but individuals on the same
social level shared more cultural characteristics than persons with the
same origin. The "container" becomes ambiguous, either by combining
local sectors of more extended groups or as the fine outline of a stack
of clearly locking containers.

Contemporarily to the "container" criticism, the humanities reorganised
their field within the last decades. "Space" lost its topographical
connotation, remodelled to "social spaces" with "transnational
connections". "Hybridity" became the most important concept for
understanding cultures; the focus shifted from "essentialism" (cultural
phenomena are practised by all members of exactly one culture) to
"transculturality" (cultures integrate elements of other cultures).
Constructivism replaced the ideal of uniform national cultures of
individuals adopting meanings out of a pre-formulated set. Relevant
paradigms changed. The identification of "master narratives" in history
was followed by the recognition of "polyvocality" and
"multiperspectivity". Ethnology lost its subject or reconstructed it to
the self-description of individuals with an "ethnicity"; cultural
anthropology shifted its methodological ideal "field work" from
long-time stay in the everyday life of the researched culture to the
imperative "follow the moving target" (Welz, 1998). The academic
research and classification of cultural phenomena ("writing culture")
was reduced to the observation of people "doing culture".

Museology withdrew from "tradition" and the "material witness" welcoming
"heritage". French heritage discourse established the perspective of the
actual members of society on their heritage and their practices of it as
"patrimoniality" (Watremez, 2008, p. 13); David Crouch (2010, p. 69)
proposed the difference of institutionalised heritage and the permanent
performance of individual "heritaging". *Heritage* includes a
problematic selectivity of what is desired as heritage and what is not.
Different political systems showed the tendency to accept some historic
phenomena as their heritage and to refuse anything else. I proposed the
description of "posthumous legacy-hunting"; David Lowenthal stressed an
absolutely fictional "heritage fabrication" (1998, pp. XVII, 121).

This battery of changed paradigms could be interpreted as the rise of
individualism as the meta-paradigm of post-modernism. If individualists
wish to be part of a group, they dislike prescriptions like *nation* or
*ethnic group* and prefer to choose or found their own community---and
leave it if it no longer fits. *Community* is a key word in contemporary
museology as well as in the current debate concerning the re-formulation
of the ICOM museum definition. The meta-paradigm *individualism*
replaced the defined, intergenerational relationship transmitting
material witnesses by a felt kinship selecting its favourite documents.

The "container" seems to be reduced to a topographic spot containing
nothing but stones and broken pieces, historical buildings and fragments
of former life. Two popular metaphors for immigration countries call
them "melting pot" or "salad bowl" with a delicate inversion: Whereas
the "container" only represents the cultural border, the "salad bowl" is
the persistent phenomenon; however, the vegetables might change.
Obviously, two "bowls" serve the preparation of the "salad" (of human
beings) and its "dressing" (with material culture), much as Andrzej
Brencz (2003) described processes of cultural adoption in Western
Poland, till 1945 part of Germany. The new settlers met material culture
left by the expelled Germans and they expressed acceptance (use) or
rejection (destruction), mirrored by using or throwing away those assets
brought from their former home. Antique dealers and the tourism of
descendants of the expelled Germans consolidated identification with the
adopted cultural assets.

But the "salad bowls" for people can be rediscovered. "Containers" are
explicitly present in widely accepted double terms like "German Turks".
The "Bio-Germans"---to use an incorrect colloquial term---were quite
surprised to have seen a Turkish immigration and later demonstrations of
Kurdish people in Germany. The partial emigration of the Turkish
intelligentsia during the Erdoğan era led to another contrast, because
in the newer emigrants’ eyes, the "German Turks" were Turkish in a very
conservative or outdated way.

Museums gathered comparable experiences. Collaboration with communities
presupposes the visibility of a community, but external and internal
views can differ. Collaboration might include essentialist
misinterpretations, either in a traditionalistic way---Turks need tea
glasses and prayer mats---or with a fashionable touch---the Near East
smokes shisha pipes. Collaboration with communities does not shelter the
museum from the criticism of other people who feel themselves to be part
of the same community. The German museum history of the 19^th^ and
20^th^ century showed that volunteers responsible for museum work were
not at all a representative cross section of the population but people
with an interest in preserving and interpreting cultural assets that
included the proclamation of individual convictions. It would be
interesting if currently collaborating communities have comparable
attitudes.

After 1945, the museum objects of Central Europe got two separate
"bowls", a "factual" and an "imagined" one: Museums survived at their
topographical spot; new regional and local museums were created on
current German territory, based either on those parts of older museum
collections evacuated into any "Western" countryside or on new
collections initiated by expelled Germans.

The balance of power seems to be less interesting today than it has been
for the ’68 generation, but it influenced and continues to influence the
heritage sector with conservative ideas of "containers": For
Nazi-Germany, exhibitions of Slavonic or antique Roman findings were
undesirable. In a neo-liberal system, it is inevitable to exhibit
spectacular Celtic objects, although the existence of a Celtic culture
is very controversial in prehistory. In today’s Poland, it seems
difficult to get state funding for non-Slavonic excavations.

Two lessons can be learnt. First the metaphor of two "salad bowls":
Cultures can use a physical, virtual, or social space; material culture
definitely has a physical place, be it as a social "dressing" or a
separate "salad bowl" for objects. The German historian Harm Klueting
invented the neologism "backwardity of locality" ("Rückwärtigkeit des
Örtlichen") to describe an attitude of hobbyists as local historians:
They tend to present phenomena because of their relation to the
topography of a current village or region without any interest in the
phenomenon itself and its historical contexts (Klueting, 1991, p. 76).
For Klueting, this is unprofessional. He overlooked the possibility that
this might provide a chance of survival to documents even if a
connection to the local identity is missing.

The second aspect concerns a super-selectivity of Simon Knell’s
"identity making museums" (2004, p. 23) provided that they avoid
"backwardity". Identity needs any "other", but this binary "we" and "not
us" restricts the variety of characteristics. Klaus Lösch’s term
"transdifference" indicates further differences---unclear, not
decidable, contradictory differences; oppositions suppressed by the
majority but not vanished completely; differences within a culture as
the result of multiple memberships of some individuals (Lösch, 2005). A
transfer of this point of view to museum work and the collecting of
cultural assets is still missing.

## References

- Blendinger, F. (1940). *Die Bevölkerungsbewegung in der ehemaligen
  Reichsstadt Weissenburg.* München, Germany, Univ., Disseration. o.
  Pag.
- Andrzej Brencz, A. (2003). Das deutsche Erbe im Prozeß der Gestaltung
  einer neuen dörflichen Kulturlandschaft im mittleren Odergebiet. In
  Mazur, Z. (Ed.). *Das deutsche Kulturerbe in den polnischen West- und
  Nordgebieten* (pp. 72--89). Wiesbaden, Germany: Harassowitz.

- Crouch, D. (2010). The perpetual performance and emergence of
  heritage. In Waterton, E. & Watson, S. (Eds.). *Culture, heritage and
  representation. Perspectives on visuality and the past* (pp. 57--71).
  Farnham, UK: Ashgate.

- Csáky, M. (2000). Ambivalenz des kulturellen Erbes. Zentraleuropa. In
  Csáky, M. (Ed.). *Ambivalenz des kulturellen Erbes. Vielfachcodierung
  des historischen Gedächtnisses. Paradigma: Österreich* (pp. 27--49).
  Innsbruck, Austria: Studienverlag.

- Klueting, H. (1991): Rückwärtigkeit des Örtlichen --
  Individualisierung des Allgemeinen. Heimatgeschichtsschreibung
  (Historische Heimatkunde) als unprofessionelle
  Lokalgeschichtsschreibung neben der professionellen
  Geschichtswissenschaft. In Klueting, E. (Ed.). *Antimodernismus und
  Reform. Zur Geschichte der deutschen Heimatbewegung* (pp. 50--89).
  Darmstadt, Germany: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.

- Knell, S. J. (2004). Altered values. Searching for a new collecting.
  In Knell, S. J. (Ed.), *Museums and the future of collecting.* 2^nd^
  edition (pp. 1--46). Farnham, UK: Ashgate.

- Lösch, K. (2005). Begriff und Phänomen der Transdifferenz. Zur
  Infragestellung binärer Differenzkonstrukte. In Allolio-Näcke, L. &
  Kalscheuer, B. & Manzeschke, A. (Eds.). *Differenzen anders denken.
  Bausteine zu einer Kulturtheorie der Transdifferenz* (pp. 26--47).
  Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Campus.

- Lowenthal, D. (1998). *The heritage crusade and the spoils of
  history.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

- Poussou, J.-P. (1994). De l’interêt de l’étude historique des
  mouvements migratoires européens du milieu du Moyen Age ... à la fin
  du XIX^e^ siècle. In: Cavaciocchi, S. (Ed.). *Le migrazioni in Europa
  secc. XIII--XVIII* (pp. 21--43). Firenze, Italy: Le Monnier.

- Watremez, A. (2008). Vivre le patrimoine urbain au quotidien. Pour une
  approche de la patrimonialité. *Culture et musées* Nr. 11, pp. 11--36.

- Welz, G. (1998). Moving Targets. Feldforschung unter Mobilitätsdruck.
  *Zeitschrift für Volkskunde,* pp. 177--194.