---
title: "The Decolonization of Museology: Museums, Mixing, and Myths of Origin"
authors: [{name:"Yves Bergeron", institution:"UQAM Chair for Museum Governance and Cultural Law"}, {name:"Michèle Rivet, C.M.", institution:"Vice-president of the Canadian Museum for Human Rights. Board Member, ICOM-Canada" }]

---

*Translated by Isabella Archer*

> The concept of "property" is new to our history. It made no sense to
> us to think that we possessed things, the earth, the elements. We see
> ourselves as a part of the universe and not as a separate entity
> within it; we have no power over the other parts, except to negotiate
> our place and our relationships with them. No living being is superior
> to others, each one is essential right where it is. For example, we
> still believe that, despite its pretense, the government cannot own
> water, because water is like air, impossible to grasp. Air and water
> do not belong to us, just like wampum belts do not belong to their
> guardians; the latter’s mandate is to protect them and to pass them
> on.
>
> Elisabeth Kaine, *Ce que nous sommes* (That Which We Are)
>
> From: Elisabeth Kaine, Jean Tanguay, Jacques Kurtness, (2016) *Voix,
> Visages, Paysages. Les Premiers Peuples et le XXIe siècle*, La boîte
> Rouge vif, 24, p.10.


In a 2019 ICOFOM call for papers, we asked the following question:
keeping in mind the new proposal for the definition of the museum that
was presented in Kyoto, do museums really engage in a critical dialogue
about the past and future of nations and communities? In other words,
are museums truly embarking on a path towards decolonization, or do they
still prop up myths of homogeneous societies? These are the initial
questions that led ICOFOM to propose its 43rd symposium, to be held in
Canada from March 15-19, 2021. The call for proposals was sent out just
as the COVID-19 pandemic was sweeping the planet, and borders closed at
the same time as museums were forced to close their doors. Visitors, and
especially tourists, had no choice but to return home. No one had
imagined a crisis on this scale. Paradoxically, while many governments
favored the maintenance of so-called essential services, museums, like
theaters and cinemas, were deemed to be dangerous for the spread of the
virus. However, the role of the museum is not exactly opposite of that
of a lockdown.

The museum, as an institution, offers an opening to the world, a space
for contemplation and reflection on culture. And yet, we have never
needed museums as much as we do now to navigate an international crisis
like the one that we are all currently living through. After all, don’t
museums promote the idea of living together?

## Museums and decolonization

Living together implies certain responsibilities; as such, museums have
committed to engaging in a reflection on their own responsibilities as
they pertain to colonialism. The new museology movement has certainly
contributed to this self-criticism of the social role of museums in
regard to culture. The theme of decolonization has penetrated the
thinking of the international museum community for several years now.
Decolonization raises questions about the origin of a country and its
own culture. This issue appears fundamental in the comprehensive
exhibitions in national museums, which offer narratives that ascribe
meaning to national myths of origin (Bouchard, 2014; Lévi-Strauss, 2001)
that are also associated with myths about identity that contribute to
the construction of collective identities. Thus, until the beginning of
the twenty-first century, Canadian museums, in particular, offered a
national history that began with the discovery of America by Europeans
in the sixteenth century. This period of contact between the Old and New
Worlds then became the point of departure for history and culture.
However, are we able to ignore the fact that indigenous peoples from
Asia roamed, occupied, and transformed North America for millennia
before the European arrival? These various points of view are visible in
Canadian national museums, but it took strong action by the First
Nations peoples for national museums to become aware of their
responsibilities in terms of decolonization, and for museum associations
and governments to become involved in the emancipation process
(Phillips, 2011; Clifford, 2013; Sleeper-Smith, 2009).

Contrary to origin myths in the Americas and elsewhere in the world,
cultural history is made up of *métissages* ("mixes"[^1]) and
hybridization (Turgeon, 2003), and is fundamentally opposed to the very
idea of ​​cultural homogeneity. Museums sometimes tend to oppose pure
origins with the concept of the *allochtone,* a term that is used to
designate that which is not native to a country. But the reality of
museums is more complex than this binary opposition, and objects and
stories at the heart of museums bear witness to the *métissage* of
cultures. What are the museum’s responsibilities in connection to these
questions of historical interpretation? In short, to which memories do
museums bear witness? Hybridization, as much an ethical choice as an
aesthetic one (Morin, 2016), favors the encounters between peoples and
between cultures. It opens the way to a creative interculturality. If we
recognize that museums are places of cultural diplomacy, how then can
they participate in this hybridization?

More than ever, questions about the representation of cultural and
indigenous communities in museums are a subject of debate. The same is
true of the delicate question of returning works of art and collections
to their communities of origin (Sarr and Savoy, 2018). There is good
reason to wonder what place museums accord the culture of cultural
communities and First Nations in national collections, as well as in
comprehensive exhibitions devoted to major national narratives. However,
how far should museums go in the decolonization and reparations process
(Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, 2015)? Does \"a museum
(\...) open to the public and in the social arena, constantly
reinventing itself, developing partnerships\" (Eidelman, 2017, p. 88) do
all this in consultation with partners from different cultural
communities or the First Nations?

## A recurring question

The decolonization of museums, as we have previously underlined, has
found itself at the heart of discussions about the social function of
the museum in the debates surrounding the proposed museum definition
during the meeting of the International Council of Museums in Kyoto in
2019 (*Museum International*, vol. 71, no 281-282). It is worth
remembering that this is not a new question, and it surfaces
periodically in the world of museums, notably due to its links to the
issue of returning works and objects to their communities of origin. As
part of the geopolitical perspective of museology, decolonization is on
the agenda of many national museum associations.

Thus, during the 25th ICOM Triennial Conference, a roundtable with
simultaneous translation was devoted to the theme *"Decolonization and
restitution: towards a more holistic perspective and a relational
approach,"* with the objective to "trace and map new and different ways
to see and think about these problems." Representatives of ICOM’s
National Committees from Australia, Brazil, Canada, India, and the
United Kingdom explained how museums approach decolonization, where they
see progress, and what challenges and obstacles they face. Participants
stressed that the decolonization of museums raises important questions
about ownership, control, and power. The discussion also focused on
restitution and the approach taken by formerly colonized countries to
address this issue. In a similar vein, ICOFOM has carried out a
three-year research program that began in 2019 called \"*Museums,
community action and decolonization*.\" What does decolonizing the
museum mean in the twenty-first century? Are current debates truly
helping to change local practices and actions? How can community
engagement in museums promote decolonization? This research program is
recognized by the Strategic Allocation Review Committee (SAREC), a
permanent ICOM committee. It aims to promote international debate and
develop theoretical tools via a new methodology that seeks to understand
the demands of communities implicated in the actions of these debates.

While the most recent debates about decolonizing the museum have
revolved around the practical and political implications of returning
cultural property, not all museums question their authority over the
treatment of colonial heritage in their collections in the same way. If
the goal of decolonization is to add depth, breadth, and new knowledge
to the canon, the discussion surrounding museum processes must account
for the power structures that lie behind knowledge production. It must
also consider the policies that engender the critical theory which
provides a basis for decolonization. Interpreting the impacts of
colonization is a fundamental challenge for institutions that give new
life to representations of the past. New issues, such as climate change
and growing social and economic inequality in all countries and regions,
along with the persistence of racism, sexism and the reproduction of
historical exclusions inside the museum, and the ways it exercises its
authority over society, have illustrated, yet again, the need to review
the practices and priorities of actions taken by museums. ICOFOM’s
2019-2021 international program aims to establish a global platform for
dialogue between communities and museums. The primary objective of this
program is to assess the decolonization of museums and to offer
\"decolonial\" and \"indigenous\" views of the museum and cultural
heritage by promoting community debates as part of the museological
dialogue. ICOFOM and its partners will serve as the main platform for
this global reflection.

The 43rd ICOFOM Symposium, *The Decolonization of Museology: Museums,
Mixing and Myths of Origin*, to be held in Montreal, Ottawa, and Quebec
City in March 2021, is part of this research program. Several questions,
found here, are on the agenda:

-   What place do museums give to the culture of cultural communities
    and First Nations in national collections and in comprehensive
    exhibitions devoted to major national narratives? How far should
    museums go to decolonize?

-   Does a museum "open to the public and in the social field,
    constantly reinventing itself, developing partnerships" do this by
    consulting with partners from different cultural communities or
    the First Nations, via partnerships and/or representation on
    museum boards, in order to make decisions regarding exhibitions
    that concern the partners?

-   Do museums engage in critical dialogue about the past and future of
    nations and communities?
-   Do museums envision a path towards decolonization, or do they still
    maintain myths of homogeneous societies?
-   What are the responsibilities of museums regarding these major
    international trends?
-   For too long, the moment of contact between the Old and New Worlds
    has served as a point of departure for history and culture. Do
    people of the First Nations need to take strong action for
    national museums to show awareness about their responsibilities
    for decolonization, and for museum associations and governments to
    involve themselves in the process?

-   What are the responsibilities of museums regarding these questions
    about how to interpret history?
-   What memories do museums bear witness to?

-   Can museums ignore the fact that indigenous peoples from Asia
    roamed, occupied, and transformed North America for millennia
    before the arrival of Europeans?

-   Hybridization, which favors the encounter between peoples and
    between cultures, opens the way to creative interculturality. How
    can museums, places of cultural diplomacy, participate in this
    hybridization?

-   How and to what extent do national museums recognize cultural
    communities and indigenous cultures?
-   How should museums interpret the contribution of various cultural
    communities to a national culture?
-   Should museums respond to the demands of the First Nations and
    cultural communities by giving them back the objects of which they
    are stakeholders?

## A rich and diverse program

Some 43 papers were selected for the symposium *The Decolonization of
Museology: Museums, Mixing and Myths of Origin*. Synopses of these
papers can be found in this publication. Although these papers cannot
answer all of the questions asked above, it is interesting to note that
they also generate new questions. Their aim is to deepen reflection and
sometimes even to provoke debate. They enrich ICOFOM’s thinking.

The authors and the subjects they address take us on a tour around the
world: to Africa, Zimbabwe, Senegal, Ivory Coast, Oceania, Asia, Europe,
North and South America, be they reflections on art museums, musées de
société, ethnographic museums, or remarks on the very foundations of the
decolonization of museology. The material is rich and the papers provide
fascinating reads.

Some of the ideas discussed and questions asked in the papers include:
recognizing and protecting the cultures of all parts of society.
Suggestions for a critical reading and review of museography. But within
the museum just how far should the participation and inclusion of all
the groups that make up society go? Reimagining museums? Rather than the
idea of ​​decolonizing (which can have the negative connotation
de-colonizing) should we not substitute the idea of belonging, and
imagine instead cultural heritage as relational? What about speaking of
"autochthonization," or indigenization? By doing so, museums become
contact zones; they upset and destabilize conventional gains. Museums
put the principles of diversity, equity, accessibility, and inclusion at
the forefront, and sometimes in difficult contexts. Perhaps museums need
to rethink the notion of heritage to better accommodate the pasts of
immigrant communities in museums. Museums are enriched by the thoughts
of First Peoples, for whom a relationship to objects can be something
quite different. The repatriation of cultural and sacred objects from
these Peoples is often discussed, sometimes in the light of the law,
much like discussions about returning cultural objects held by large
museums: who is responsible for protecting the Parthenon friezes? Should
not the decolonization of museology focus more on studying current
structures of dominant power, such as language or the dissemination of
research, rather than colonial power structures?

While most of the proposals concentrate on decolonizing museums, a few
contributors chose to study the decolonization of the discipline of
museology. François Mairesse approaches this delicate question by first
referencing the position of Hugues de Varine in remarks made in 2005, as
well as the work of Teresa Scheiner (2017) and Bruno Brulon Soares and
Anna Leshchenko (2018). Mairesse recalls criticism levied at French
museology, which has been accused of appropriating theory from outside
European frameworks. The author also invokes the question of the
dominant linguistic spaces, \"which are French and English\[,\] and the
openness to other spaces, such as Brazilian or Chinese, which have
considerable amounts of museological literature, in order to better
reflect the diversity of the global museum system -- for example, the
way of conceiving the museum." As Mairesse points out, we should not
forget that academic literature, though it aims to be international, is
nonetheless primarily aimed at a local audience. However, one cannot
deny the fact that the *lingua franca* is still currently English, and
that it is imperative to write in this language to disseminate research.
Addressing this delicate question requires thinking about the
recognition and notoriety spread by citing and disseminating
publications. As such, the members of ICOFOM have a crucial
responsibility, because, through their work and their teaching, are they
not responsible for drawing attention to the diversity of viewpoints
being expressed?

Examining the conference proposals, it is clear that the question of the
place of the First Nations has attracted the attention of the research
community. The discussions will focus primarily on the various issues
associated with the responsibilities of museums with regard to this
topic. However, they will not fully shed light on the place of cultural
communities in the great collective narratives proposed by national
museums. It would certainly be useful to revisit this theme at a future
ICOFOM symposium.

At the time of writing in late October 2020, when the coronavirus
pandemic continues to swiftly rage around the world, it is difficult to
imagine what format these debates will take. But it is certain that they
will lead us to better understand the mission of museums in the
twenty-first century and to better understand the New museology
movement, which began nearly fifty years ago and has ended up rising to
the top of the various subcommittees of the International Council of
Museums questioning museological dogma.

## References

- Ames, M. M. (1992). *Cannibal Tours and Glass Boxes, The Anthropology of
  Museums*. Vancouver: UBC Press.
- Bouchard, G. (2014). *Raison et déraison du mythe. Au cœur des
  imaginaires collectifs*. Montréal: Boréal.

- [B]{.smallcaps}rulon [S]{.smallcaps}oares [B. & L]{.smallcaps}eshchenko
  [A. (2018).]{.smallcaps} Museology in Colonial Context: A call for
  Decolonisation of Museum Theory. *Icofom Study Series*, 46, 61--79.

- Katzew, I. (Ed.). (2012). *Contested Visions in the Spanish Colonial
  World*. Los Angeles: Los Angeles County Museum of Art; New Haven: Yale
  University Press.

- Clavir, M. (2002). *Preserving What is Valued: Museums, Conservation,
  and First Nations*. Vancouver: UBC Press.

- Clifford, J. (2013). *Returns, Becoming Indigenous in the Twenty-First
  Century*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

- Commission de vérité et réconciliation du Canada (2015) *Honorer la
  vérité, réconcilier pour l’avenir. Sommaire du rapport final de la
  Commission de vérité et réconciliation du Canada*, 584 p.
  http://www.trc.ca/assets/pdf/French_Exec_Summary_web_revised.pdf

- Duncan, J. C. (1971). The Museum, a Temple or the Forum. California
  Academy of Sciences. *Curator*, 14(1), 11-24.
  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2151- 6952.1971.tb00416.x

- Eidelman, J. (Dir.). (2017). *Inventer des musées pour demain, Rapport
  de la Mission Musées XXIe siècle.* Paris: La documentation française.

- Fourcade, M.-B. (Ed.). (2008) *Patrimoines des migrations, migrations
  des patrimoines*. Sainte-Foy: Presses de l’Université Laval.

- Godelier, M. (2013). *Lévi-Strauss*. Paris: Seuil.

- Janes, R. J. (2009). *Museums in a Troubled World: Renewal, Irrelevance
  or Collapse?* London: Routledge.

- Kaine, E. (2016). *Voix, visages, paysages. Les Premiers Peuples et le
  XXI^e^ siècle*. Québec: Presses de l’Université Laval.

- Lévi-Strauss, C. (2001). *Race et histoire*. Paris: Albin Michel et
  UNESCO.

- Mairesse, F. (Dir.). (2016). *Nouvelles tendances de la muséologie*.
  Paris: La documentation française.

- Mairesse, F. (Dir.). (2015). Nouvelles tendances de la muséologie **--**
  New Trends in Museology **-** Nuevas tendencias de la museología**.**
  *ICOFOM Study Series*, 43b.
  [[https://journals.openedition.org/iss/367]{.ul}](https://journals.openedition.org/iss/367)

- McCarthy, C. (2007). *Exhibiting Maori, A History of Colonial Cultures
  of Display*.

- Morin, E. (2016). *Sur l’esthétique. Paris: Robert Laffont*. Nora, P.
  (1984, 1986, 1992).

- *Museum international.* The Museum Definition the Backbone of Museums,
  vol. 71, no 281-282, 2019, ICOM.

- Nora, P. (1984, 1986, 1992). *Les Lieux de mémoire .* Paris: Gallimard.
  *La République* 1984), t. 2 *La Nation* 1986 *Les France*.

- Phillips, R. B. (2011). *Museum Pieces: Toward the Indigenization of
  Canadian Museums*. London: McGill-Queens University Press.

- Price, S. (2007). *Paris primitive: Jacques Chirac’s Museum on the Quai
  Branly*. Chicago: University Press of Chicago.

- Ross, K. (2013). Slice of heaven: 20th Century Aotearoa: Biculturalism
  and Social History at the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa.
  *Aboriginal policy studies*, 2(2), 115-127.

- Sarr, F., & Savoy, B. (2018). *Rapport sur la restitution du patrimoine
  culturel africain. Vers une nouvelle éthique relationnelle*. Paris:
  Ministère de la Culture.

- Scheiner, T. (2016). Réfléchir sur le champ muséal : significations et
  impact théorique de la muséologie. In F. Mairesse (Dir.), *Nouvelles
  tendances de la muséologie* (pp. 41-53). Paris : La documentation
  française.
- Simon, N. (2010). *The Participatory Museum*. Santa Cruz, CA: Museum
  2.0.

- Sleeper-Smith, S. (Ed.). (2009). *Contesting Knowledge, Museums and
  Indigenous Perspective*s. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

- Turgeon, L. (2003). *Patrimoines métissés: contextes coloniaux et
  postcoloniaux*. Paris: Éditions de la Maison des sciences de l’homme.
  Québec: Presses de l’Université Laval.

[^1]: The French word *métissage* (and its adjective form, *métisse)*, lacks an exact English translation. *Métissage*, translated in the title of the call for papers as "mixes," can refer to mixing or intermixing of racial and ethnic groups, cultural diversity, multiculturalism, or a multiethnic, multicultural, and/or diverse society, depending on its context in a sentence. It can also refer to many of these concepts at once. To remind readers that the word can be translated in different ways, *métissage* has been left in French when it appeared in the original French version of the text. (Translator’s note.)
