---
title: "Repatriation from Another Perspective: Implications for Chinese Museums and Decolonization"
authors: [{name: "Lin Li", institution: "Reinwardt Academie – Amsterdam, Netherlands"}]
---

Repatriation is an attractive issue in China. Colonialism and invasion
wars are attributed to be the main reasons for Chinese objects’ removal
(Fang, 2009). There were many Chinese cultural objects, such as the
Admonition Scroll and the Old Summer Palace bronze heads, removed from
their place of origin and sent abroad from 1840 to the mid-20th century.
When the auction of the Old Summer Palace bronze heads took place in
France in 2009, repatriation became the most popular social topic that
year. According to Cao Bingwu (2009), the question of repatriating those
bronze heads is not only a legal issue but also a moral one, which
largely relates to national sovereignty and emotion. Wang and Zhang
(2009) thinks that all similar Chinese cultural objects must be
unconditionally returned to China to safeguard China’s national
sovereignty and dignity. Wang Kaixi (2014) points out that repatriation
should be prioritized as a diplomatic issue between national
governments. He continues that the heritage object is a vehicle of its
nation’s politics, economy, culture, ideology, value, and as such it
cannot be well-valued abroad.

It seems that the Chinese's claims of repatriation for colonial reasons
are not being seen in the context of decolonization. However, the
picture of the Chinese understanding of repatriation is neither clear
nor convincing enough because of the lack of empirical research on
Chinese repatriation. My research questions aim to examine whether the
repatriation claimed under the umbrella of colonialism in China stems
from decolonization; whether the Chinese people’s understanding of and
attitude toward repatriation are following the spirit of diversity,
inclusion, and equality; and whether Chinese museums are moving in the
direction of decolonization.

## Method

### Research Design

A qualitative approach was chosen as the method for this research.
Because of the lack of research into the ways that ordinary Chinese
understand repatriation, a qualitative approach could help to explore
existing opinions and reveal the overlooked dimensions of repatriation
among Chinese people. In order to encourage a participant’s willingness
of expression, the one-to-one interview was selected to conduct this
study. In this way, the researcher could create an in-depth conversation
with the participants through which their opinions could be understood
comprehensively.

### Participants

The 16 participants of this research were all Chinese, with fourteen
from the Han ethnic group and two from minority ethnic groups. The age
group of participants ranged from 18 to 48.

### Interview

Data collection took place in March 2020. Every participant was required
to participate in a one-to-one interview with the researcher. Because of
the stay-at-home order during the COVID-19 pandemic, all the interviews
took place through a WeChat video call. All the interviews were recorded
and fully transcribed into text in Chinese. All the questions were
organized into a structured interview that comprised four parts.

The first part was about the participant’s general impression of and
preference for museums. This part included nine questions. No. 1 was
about the motivation for visiting museums, No. 2 and No. 3 were about
preferred kinds of museums, No. 4 was about the personal significance of
visiting museums, No. 5 and No. 6 were about the authority of museums,
and Nos. 7 to 9 were about the museum’s mission and function.

There were a further nine questions in the second part about the
participant’s attitude towards colonial history, western culture, and
Chinese culture. For example, \"What is the influence of the
colonization history of China to yourself and your life?\", \"Do you
expect any change about that influence?\", \"Is it necessary to export
Chinese culture abroad?\"

The third part focused on the repatriation of Chinese heritage objects
which were removed from China during the colonial time and are currently
collected by public museums abroad. This part included eight questions:
1) Do you support repatriating those objects from their current museum
to China? 2) What kind of heritage object should be returned to China?
3) What value and impact will the repatriation have? 4) Does the
repatriation have personal significance to you? 5) Who should
participate in the process of decision-making about repatriation? 6)
Would you accept shared ownership and loans as alternatives to
repatriation? 7) Where should the object be repatriated to? 8) Which
part of the object’s story do you prefer to see in museums after
repatriation?

The fourth part was about the participant’s understanding of
decolonization. The three questions in this part were familiarity,
personal understanding of decolonization, and the relationship between
decolonization and museums.

### Data analysis

All the participants’ responses were coded into five categories,
including a powerful China, an influential China,
Chinese-centralization, the national perspective, and the individual
perspective. The participants’ responses with the theme of China’s
national strength, making and proving a powerful China, were coded into
the category of \"a powerful China\". The responses with the theme of
improving China’s global status, promoting China’s influence abroad,
and exporting Chinese culture were coded into the category of \"an
influential China\". The category of \"Chinese-centralization\"
comprised responses about prioritizing the Chinese perspective,
emphasizing the Chinese value, and ignoring others’ cultures. The
category of \"prioritizing national perspective\" included responses
with the theme of prioritizing the national or government’s perspective
and supporting the nation’s possession of cultural objects. Finally,
the responses with the theme of dwarfing individual perspectives and
disrespecting private property were coded into the category of
\"dwarfing individual perspective\".

## Results and Conclusion

The Chinese understanding of repatriation is the opposite of that
emphasizing the principles of diversity, inclusion, and equality. Five
characteristics were found in the Chinese understanding of repatriation
of objects lost during colonial times. Firstly, the Chinese often
associate the return of cultural objects lost during the colonial period
with China’s national strength. Many people believe that the reason for
repatriation is a powerful China. At the same time, the return of
objects from foreign museums to China appears to be strong evidence of
China’s increasing national strength. The Chinese always prefer
strength rather than morality as their judgment code, which is
essentially a distrust of and disrespect for an equal and open
international cultural conversation. Secondly, from the perspective of
most Chinese people, the value of repatriation is to prove China’s
increasing international influence and improve China’s global status.
At the same time, the returned objects are often perceived as a tool to
attract more foreigners to come to China and receive Chinese culture,
which will help China prevail in the world’s cultural competition.
Thirdly, the Chinese attention to the returned object is limited to the
stories before it left China. At the same time, many Chinese people
think that the object has lost its real value since leaving China. They
rarely care about or acknowledge the foreigner’s interpretation of an
object, which is a Chinese-centralized and exclusive attitude towards
the repatriated object. Fourthly, the Chinese always take a national
perspective on the return of cultural objects. On the one hand, the
importance to the nation is the main and primary significance of
repatriation. Many people think that objects which are valuable to the
country should be considered for return first. On the other hand, the
national and governmental organizations are the main stakeholders of
repatriation and should participate in the decision-making process. This
approach of prioritizing the national perspective has largely restrained
the diverse value of cultural objects. Finally, Chinese people are used
to ignoring and dwarfing the personal perspective in repatriation. On
the one hand, personal property is not respected, as many Chinese do not
support returning the object to its original owner and his or her
descendants. On the other hand, people think that the return of cultural
objects does not have personal importance to them. When their personal
opinions conflict with the nation’s will, they will hand the priority
over to the nation. In this case, the personal connection between
repatriation and each individual is weak in China.

Thus, repatriation for colonial reasons in China has almost nothing to
with decolonization, even though many Chinese experts and scholars
regard colonial expansion and war as some of the main reasons for the
loss of cultural objects. Chinese people also strongly demand the return
of the objects. However, most people in China are unfamiliar with and
even ignorant of decolonization. Decolonization has never been the
purpose or motivation of the return of Chinese objects. Repatriation is
a political issue, with the purpose of shaping a powerful and
influential China. The Chinese understanding of repatriation is full of
exclusiveness and inequality based on the national perspective and
Chinese-centralization ideology. This kind of repatriation risks the
loss of cultural diversity and is far from the value of decolonization.
The essence of repatriation should be the canceling of inequalities and
the promotion of diverse perspectives of knowledge. The process of
repatriation is not equal to the task of prioritizing the source
nation's interpretation and ideology. In that case, repatriation will
lead to another kind of inequality. Instead of that, an object's return
should commit as well to bringing people back to an equal conversation
based on critical thinking, rational analysis, and self-determination.

Finally, Chinese museums are not on the path of decolonization now. In
China, the museum is a national cultural propaganda institution
promoting the nation’s interests and prioritizing Chinese values. Its
mission is to provide Chinese people with cultural and political
education and export Chinese culture abroad. At the same time, the
Chinese audience’s participation in the museum is superficial. The
audiences are excluded from the operation and decision-making systems of
museums. There is only one voice in Chinese museums. Such museums are
more likely to be on the path toward colonization rather than
decolonization.

## References

- Cao, B. (2009). A reflection on upsurge of repatriation: from the
  special issue of \"Museum International\". *Museum International*,
  61(4), 76-80.
- Fang, H. (2009). Principles, concepts and strategies for the
  repatriation of cultural relics. overseas. *Exploration and Free
  Views*, (3), 40-44.

- Wang, K. (2014). How can historical relics lost in overseas be
  regained? On the ways for coming back to China by international legal
  principals. *Journal of Beijing Normal University (Social Sciences)*,
  (6), 44-57.

- Wang Z, Zhang J. (2009). Retrospect and prospect of the study on the
  loss and return of the Chinese cultural relics. *Southeast Culture*,
  (1), 16-22.