---
title: "The Politics of Decolonization and the Museum Enigma"
authors: [{name:"Lynn Maranda", institution:"Curator Emerita, Museum of Vancouver"}]
---

Museums, a western construct, are constantly "reinventing" themselves to
suit the current socio-political trend of the day. They are continually
looking for a niche in which to frame their existence, let alone their
diverse messages. They seek for new meaning and more relevant
definitions of who they are. Many rebrand themselves for public
acceptance and change their internal administrative hierarchies to match
those of the corporate world where Directors become Chief Executive
Officers. Professional level museum staff have even taken on guest
friendly titles to include such words as 'visitor experience' and
'collections engagement', perhaps in a quest to increase the public's
comprehension of their raison d'Ãªtre. Nevertheless, museums are caught
in the grip of a troubled world where the ethnosphere is concerned
(Janes, 2009).

It could be said that the Canadian experience represents a benchmark for
the discussion at hand, even though any territory that has been heavily
colonized by immigrants of European origin would see similarities.
Nevertheless, when talking about decolonization and museums, the subject
matter is similar and the current situation is the result of the
thousands of years over which waves of first peoples have migrated here,
populating the land long before the arrival of western colonizers.

In the political arena in Canada, indigenous populations are governed by
the 1876 Indian Act, which was then primarily aimed at their
assimilation into mainstream Canadian society by outlawing their
languages and cultural mores and enforced by incarcerating children in
residential schools, outlawing ceremonies (Potlatch ban 1885-1951), and
moving peoples off 'traditional' lands in favour of an enforced Reserve
system. Indigenous persons registered with the government become Status
Indians eligible for benefits, rights and services. Those subject to the
Indian Act were organized into Bands with Band Councils being their
basic unit of government. Today, while the Act has undergone many
changes, it still exists, is still administered by the government and
still allows the government to control most aspects of indigenous life.
Consequently, as wards of the government, indigenous peoples are not
free to determine and pursue their own destiny.

Yet they have become very vocal as regards their contested 'traditional'
territories through land claims, of compensation related to the
residential school system, of how the justice system has treated them,
of the removal of resources from their traditional lands, of squalid
living conditions, and of other blatant discriminations. In 2008, the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada was officially launched as
part of the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement and the
'reconciliation'.

buzz word has become front and centre to government interaction with
First Nations populations. Nevertheless, because of ghettoizing
indigenous peoples and continually treating them as different, inferior,
or even as a source of curiosity, a state of decolonization may never be
achieved.

With the absence of decolonization on a national scale as regards the
indigenous populations still living under the yoke of government
control, there is little wonder that museums ---housing and exhibiting
material culture originating from these peoples and also relying on
governments for funding--- are not leading the way forward in an
endeavour to right the wrongs of the past. Given their ready
accessibility, museums have the capability to sow the seeds of change
not only in the minds of their visitors, but also at the highest levels
of government, but this has not been the case. Consequently, museums
with their own 'political' corporate structures often feel bound to
follow suit for their own survival. In this way, museums have created
their own enigma, beyond which they seemingly have not or cannot reach.

There are, however, museums that are endeavouring to come to grips with
decolonization by being responsive to indigenous voices for inclusion in
collections, exhibitions, interpretation and information dissemination,
as well as in the area of repatriation of ancestor remains and of
ceremonial and sacred objects of cultural patrimony.

For Canadian museums holding First Nations archaeological and
ethnological collections, and pursuant to *The Spirit Sings* boycott
(Phillips, 2011, p. 12), the impetus for museum change was grounded in
the 1992 Task Force Report on Museums and First Peoples sponsored by the
Assembly of First Nations and Canadian Museums Association. The Report
specifically recommends that partnerships be established between First
Nations and museums in such areas as interpretation, access,
repatriation, training, and implementation. In spite of its best
intentions, as funding to effect implementation was not forthcoming from
the Canadian Government, the Report became a shelved document without
teeth, although museums could accept it 'in spirit' or provide their own
financing.

The 1994 symposium *Curatorship: Indigenous Perspectives in
Post-Colonial Societies* focused on Promoting Cultural Equity: Museums
and Indigenous Peoples, and "organized around the realignment of
relationships between indigenous and non-indigenous peoples...in the
context of traditional museum practices" (Cummins, 1996, p. iii). Its
resolutions included that museum professionals must work towards
"finding alterations or extensions to the museum concept,"
"deconstructing the colonial perceptions of museums and other public
institutions that collect ... past indigenous cultures," "redefining the
idea of 'museum' from houses of indigenous peoples of the past\...to
consider that museums house cultures and cultural meanings that reflect
living cultures for indigenous people" (p. 197) and that museums "cease
patronizing indigenous and aboriginal groups by assuming a right or role
in speaking for such groups" (p. 201).

Much has been written on what museums should/should not do as regards
their interface with indigenous populations. Canada, being a young
federation initially cobbled together by immigrants of European origin,
is still trying to locate its own identity. Nevertheless, it needs to
come to grips with its internal issues, not only with respect to its
indigenous peoples, who have populated the land since the retreat of the
ice some 10,000 years ago, but also to its growing ethnically diverse
population, much of which comes from Asia. Canada faces missing out by
not incorporating its indigenous peoples into its 'national culture' and
thus is in danger of losing what these peoples could be contributing to
making this country. Canada is not homogenous -- its culture is
multiculturalism and museums are expected to serve that culture.
Nevertheless, museums have been slow to respond where indigenous
cultures are concerned.

Museums are their own sociopolitical corporate entities administered by
a government, by a Board of Trustees, or by some other body to which
they are held responsible. While public opinion can often weigh heavily,
museum staffs are not free to set their own course outside of their
institutions' internal policies, and this has often led to an enigmatic
lack of action where the ethnosphere is concerned. Museums continue to
be self-serving and to maintain an ingrained ethos of superiority and
right of appropriation and ownership not only of the collections, but
also of their accompanying intellectual property. Museums still do not
fully embrace their obligations to stewardship. Many still maintain
their predatory ways for collections acquisition in an arena of
competing wants for scarce resources, where supply is low and demand
high both in the marketplace and in the field, and many have suffered
the consequences of their actions.

Due to their intrinsic learned knowledge base and their societal
position of control, museums have exerted their power over information
construction and dissemination (the politics of representation) and,
until recently, this has neither been questioned nor challenged. In
other words, the museum "has fundamentally become a mirror of the
societal values of the predominant culture in which it is located"
(Maranda, 2015, p. 60). Nevertheless, museums "are one with the
community, regardless of that community's cultural composition, and they
should be a primary vehicle through which minorities communicate their
histories and lifeways to others" (p. 63).

How can this enigma be addressed? The museum's approach to its own
existence is itself a colonizing act and requires a change of mind set.
While there may be ingrained political and societal barriers that are
difficult to overcome, much of the impasse comes down to such basic
human mores as perception and attitude. Change at this level can
kick-start real change at the institutional level. The underlying
recommendation advanced in the Task Force Report on Museums and First
Peoples is one of partnership---the movement away from self-centeredness
towards inclusivity. This would mean that the museum ethos would need to
evolve "from inward to outward looking ... from paternalistic to
respectful, from independent to sharing, from reactive to proactive,
from single to multiple voices and perspectives ..." and such "a major
attitudinal shift would constitute a complete re-evaluation and
re-alignment of institutional values..." and would require "a fully
committed, policy-driven effort by the museum to effect the necessary
results" (Maranda, 2015, p. 63).

While many museums are engaging in such processes as consultation and
even collaboration, spawned by "native activism and academic epiphanies"
(Lonetree, 2012, p. 16), neither go so far as that of an equal
partnership whereby the roles of both museum and indigenous peoples are
shared equally. Trained curators, perhaps unknowingly espousing their
own form of scientific colonialism, are not the only persons who can
create meaningful exhibitions and disseminate meaningful information.
Why cannot museum curators become facilitators while indigenous persons
take on roles as curators? While there may be a tension between learned
information and traditional knowledge passed down verbally through the
generations, and despite the perception that memory can be elusive,
museums need to acknowledge differences and embrace multiple voices.
Further, why cannot a full partnership be achieved whereby indigenous
peoples have a voice in all aspects of museum activity in presenting
indigenous lifeways and thought? And indigenous peoples sitting on
Museum Boards -- why not?

Even the politics of museums as "keeping places" to be shared with
indigenous peoples goes to the heart of what museums need to do to
decolonize the imbalance that exists. Issues involving repatriation
could well be ameliorated if an equality of access could be brokered.
The closer the interaction the greater the benefit for both
demographics; by equally sharing the museum sphere, perhaps the stresses
generated by an "us first" ethos will devolve into an "us together"
stance. If this does not work, museums could become a construct of the
past.

**References**

- Cummins, A. et al. (1996). *Curatorship: Indigenous Perspectives in
  Post-Colonial Societies* Proceedings. Ottawa: Canadian Museum of
  Civilization Mercury Series, Paper 8.
- Janes, R.J. (2009). *Museums in a Troubled World*. London: Routledge.
- Lonetree, A. (2012). *Decolonizing Museums*. Chapel Hill: University
  of North California Press.
- Maranda, L. (2015). The Voice of the Other: Breaking with Museum
  Tradition. *Complutum*, 26(2), 59-66.
- Phillips, R.B. (2011). *Museum Pieces: Towards the Indigenization of
  Canadian Museums*. London: McGill-Queen's University Press.
- Task Force Report on Museums and First Peoples. (1992). *Turning the
  Page: Forging New Partnerships Between Museums and First Peoples.*
  Ottawa.

This paper contains information that originates from the author's personal first-hand knowledge garnered over 44 years as a museum anthropology curator.