---
title: "Heritage Narratives at the Itaipu Archaeology Museum: Territory and Resistance through Artisanal Fishing"
authors: [{name: "Maria De Simone Ferreira", institution: "Museu Histórico Nacional – Rio de Janeiro, Brazil"}]
---

This paper analyzes the cultural and natural heritage narratives
produced directly and indirectly by the *Museu de Arqueologia de Itaipu*
(MAI) (Itaipu Archaeology Museum). We argue that these narratives have
inaugurated an unprecedented temporality in Itaipu, city of Niterói,
Brazil, based on prehistoric archaeology, forging, thus, for the museum
staff and the local fishing community new approaches to proclaim their
memories and write their history. Therefore, we acknowledge the
resistance movement of traditional fishing in Itaipu as one of the
native processes of appropriation of the cultural heritage grammar as a
means to solidify their belonging to that territory.

## Should museum and community be opponents?

The MAI was established in 1977 in the national protected ruins of the
colonial Retreat of Saint Teresa. In the late 1970s, Itaipu was
undergoing severe urbanization and real state speculation, which led to
the destruction of prehistoric sites identified with the *sambaqui*
(shell moundbuilders) culture (Kneip, 1979), and the threat of
gentrification of the fishing community (Kant de Lima, 1997); the MAI
was then created in a context of derangement of the social order in
Itaipu.

The MAI was conceived by the president of the *Instituto do Patrimônio
Histórico e Artístico Nacional* (National Historic and Artistic Heritage
Institute of Brazil) Renato Soeiro, and the architect Edgard Jacintho,
who both incorporated in their project the new integral museum
conception from the Roundtable of Santiago of Chile (1972) (Ferreira,
2017). The archaeological sites -- the *Duna Grande* (Great Dune) site,
in particular -- and the artifacts collected in its vicinities by the
local fishing inspector Hildo de Mello Ribeiro would be the backbone of
the upcoming museum alongside an expected touristic and economic
development of the Fisherman’s Village of Itaipu (Arquivo Central do
Iphan/RJ, n.d.). This artisanal fishing community dating back to the
18^th^ century, whose know-how of the fishing techniques and the natural
territory was acquired from previous generations of fishermen (Pessanha,
2003), was also regarded as a living component of the local heritage,
since they were "in the process of rapid dismantling caused by the
modernization of the fishing industry, \[the *caiçara*[^1] elements\]
remember the *sambaquis* builders" (Arquivo Central do Iphan/RJ, 1977,
Soeiro’s speech).[^2]

The social reproduction of the communal identity among the fishermen of
Itaipu was manifested during the cycle of the mullet fishing, in which
the natives recognized themselves as belonging to a fishing company from
Itaipu where all the mastering of the fishery art was transmitted by the
elders (Kant de Lima, 1997; Pessanha, 2003). Nonetheless, in the 1970s
the natural resources started to become scarce due to the opening of a
canal between the Itaipu lagoon and the beach by a construction company,
the growing urbanization of the area, and the expansion of industrial
fishing. All of which have affected the annual migration route and
spawning area of the mullet, increased sea pollution, and imposed on the
fishermen the loss of their territory (Souza, 2016).

The fishing community of Itaipu also perceived the MAI as a key element
in those times of instability. Social problems were soon attributed to
the museum, either because local families had been expelled from the
protected ruins, or because of the authoritarian collecting methods of
Mello Ribeiro, or yet because of the restricted use of the *Duna Grande*
site, a then ludic and fishing spot for the community. The museum had
turned into a target of resistance for the residents of Itaipu who,
above all, never felt recognized in the archaeological exhibition of the
MAI at the time. Seu Chico, a leadership of fishermen, demanded the
museum to expose the "true history of Itaipu" since "we don’t have the
history of Itaipu \[there\], (...) the museum doesn’t know the
truth"[^3] (Souza, 2012, personal communication), as his daughter Érika
summarizes the idea: "the museum should tell our history"[^4] (Ribeiro,
2006, p. 206).

Although the MAI seem to have failed the local community regarding the
institution’s communication power in those troubled years, we would like
to enhance that in the realm of "subterranean memories" (Pollak, 1989,
p. 4), the museum has stimulated the production of marginal narratives
as an inverse pillar of identity to that represented in the museum’s
prehistoric collection and exhibition. The museum language was thereby
re-appropriated by the fishermen of Itaipu to create a sense of cohesion
guided by the reframing of their everyday objects, which would
eventually gain a testimonial and monumental character. A new
temporality had to be formulated with the fishing decay of Itaipu. The
construction of a discourse of authenticity by the fishermen then stood
on the antiquity of their identity, rooted in a territory filled with
the presence of a millennial prehistoric tradition, this one equally
characterized by the practice of fishing (Ferreira, 2017).

## Cultural and natural heritage as a common territory

In the following decades, the MAI did not succeed in the endeavor of
becoming a territory museum as originally conceived, despite the
museum’s tendency in the 1980s to break through barriers and try to act
in the surrounding space: a protection process of the *Duna Grande* site
was initiated at IPHAN in 1986 and the landscape of Itaipu, the
Fisherman’s Village included, was inscribed on the State of Rio de
Janeiro heritage list in 1987. At the same time, the fishermen community
was struggling for the right to an identity space within the narratives
of the national history, they would be legally recognized as a
traditional population by the Brazilian Constitution of 1988. Besides,
the community had begun to gradually consolidate an argument in favor of
the work and life style of the artisanal fishery as being responsible
for the preservation of the landscape and other cultural heritage of
Itaipu (Pereira, 1997).

According to the inherited ancestor knowledge and to the centennial
presence of their families in that territory, the Itaipu fishermen
devised some identity strategies that were afterwards conceded by the
Brazilian State. In the late 1990s, the fishermen of the *Morro das
Andorinhas* (Swallow Hill) in Itaipu litigated on municipal and state
levels for the right to remain in that natural protected area, the
residents were incorporated in 2007 into a State Park and legally
validated as a traditional rural and fishing population. In 2011, the
artisanal fishing of Itaipu was inscribed on the intangible heritage
list of the city of Niterói. And, in 2013, the Marine Extractive Reserve
of Itaipu was created by the State Environment Institute of Rio de
Janeiro, highlighting the identity of this fishermen community as an
active agent in the sustainable management of the marine environment.
The Itaipu fishermen vindicated, by their own means, the geographical
space and the archaeological heritage as an amalgam for their new
reshaped identity, based on a resistance regime: from the MAI they
required the disclosure of their discourse of identity.

In the 2000s, the MAI engaged in overcoming the distance between the
museum and the community. An effort that found in the National Museum
Policy (2003) and the Statute of Museums (2009) the correspondence once
imagined for the MAI in terms of an active, participant, and democratic
museology, in service of the development of society. We cite as an
example the institution’s exhibition "*Faces de Itaipu*" ("Faces of
Itaipu") (2015), for it can be comprised as a metonymy for the yearnings
of the community in sharing the technical curatorship with the museum,
thus deciding which pictures of members of the community taken in the
1960s and 70s by the photographer Ruy Lopes should be exhibited (Araújo,
2016).

The MAI decided to place itself in the "contact zone" (Clifford, 1997,
p. 192) the moment the authority over the objects was shared with the
natives, who, in their turn, demanded that their personal pictures
should also be included in the exhibit. The communal identity
extrapolated its boundaries so as to give way to the nominal exhibition
of each individual through their own photo images. The purpose of "Faces
of Itaipu" was to emphasize the exhibit process, we acknowledge though
that the narrative capacity of the museum and its malleability have been
apprehended by the local community in the last four decades in a way
that they can formulate what they consider to be their collective
memory, even if it is in a process of "auto-archeologization" of the
"self" (Sarlo, 2007, p. 38). Cultural heritage thus becomes the mirror
of the image of the fishermen’s representation of themselves.

## Conclusion

Although the MAI may not have contemplated the fishermen of Itaipu back
when it was founded in 1977, the cultural heritage reference established
by the institution has allowed a requalification of the historic
condition of the native group. The risks of fishing extinction in Itaipu
alongside the not so well received novelty of a museum in that territory
have enabled, however, the local social group to make use of the
heritage vocabulary. In other words, this centennial fishing community
soon realized that the political use of the remains of the past was a
central authenticity argument for them as a subjugated culture to be
able to enunciate their understanding of the memory of Itaipu.

## References

- Araújo, M. L. (2016). *Personal communication to Maria De Simone
  Ferreira*. December 14, 2016.
- Arquivo Central do IPHAN/RJ. (no date). Edgard Jacintho’s report on
  works for the installation of the MAI, no date. *Série Inventário* --
  Niterói/RJ -- Recolhimento de Santa Teresa: remanescentes (C709P2692).

- Arquivo Central do IPHAN/RJ. (1997). Renato Soeiro’s speech for the
  inauguration of the MAI in March 22, 1977. *Série Inventário* --
  Niterói/RJ -- Recolhimento de Santa Teresa: remanescentes.

- Clifford, J. (1997). *Travel and translation in the late twentieth
  century*. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

- Ferreira, M. (2017). *Percursos da memória: narrativas sobre o
  patrimônio no Museu de Arqueologia de Itaipu* (Unpublished doctoral
  dissertation). Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro, Rio
  de Janeiro.

- Kant de Lima, R. (1997). (Ed.) *Pescadores de Itaipu: meio ambiente,
  conflito e ritual no litoral do Estado do Rio de Janeiro*. Niterói:
  UFF.

- Kneip, L. (1979). *Pesquisas de salvamento em Itaipu -- Niterói/RJ*.
  Rio de Janeiro: Gráfica Luna.

- *Mesa Redonda de Santiago do Chile*. (1972, May 31). Retrieved April
  16, 2020 from
  http://www.museologia-portugal.net/files/texto_de_apoio_01_declaracoes.pdf

- Pereira, L. (1997). Revisitando Itaipu: um ensaio de antropologia
  visual. In Kant de Lima, R. (Ed.), *Pescadores de Itaipu*: *meio
  ambiente, conflito e ritual no litoral do Estado do Rio de Janeiro*
  (pp. 265-333). Niterói: UFF.

- Pessanha, E. (2003). *Os companheiros*: *trabalho e sociabilidade na
  pesca em Itaipu*. Niterói: UFF.

- Pollak, M. (1989). Memória, esquecimento, silêncio. *Estudos
  históricos*, v. 2, n. 3, 3-15.

- Ribeiro, D. (2007). *A Ciência da Informação em ação: um estudo sobre
  os fluxos da informação no Museu de Arqueologia de Itaipu*
  (Unpublished master’s thesis). Universidade Federal Fluminense,
  Niterói.

- Sarlo, B. (2007) *Tempo passado: cultura da memória e guinada
  subjetiva*. Belo Horizonte: UFMG.

- Souza, J. N. (2012). *Personal communication to Juliene Tardeli Cruz*.
  November 18, 2012.

- Souza, J. N. "Seu Chico". (2016). *Personal communication to Maria De
  Simone Ferreira*. July 11, 2016.

[^1]: *Caiçara*: descendants of the indigenous people and the Portuguese colonizers who live in coastal areas and practice small-scale fishing.

[^2]: Author translation.

[^3]: Author translation.

[^4]: Author translation.
