---
title: "Musealization is an Indigenous Business: Reflections About Objects and Subjects in the Museological Chain of the Indian Museum of Rio de Janeiro"
authors: [{name:"Leandro Guedes", institution:"Federal University of Rio de Janeiro State – Rio de Janeiro, Brazil"}]
---

Over the 1970’s, the Czech museologist Zbynek Zbyslav Stránský
introduces the discussion about the term "musealization", which was
brought to the center of the theoretical debate in Museology. Recent
theories and critical reviews held in international forums, such as the
International Committee for Museology (ICOFOM), and in Brazil, in the
thirteen undergraduate and three postgraduate courses dedicated to the
Museology[^1] for example.

Still searching for its place in the scientific field, Museology seeks
to resolve some metamuseological issues, as defined by Stránský, in a
reflexive perspective that involves museum theory and practice. This
search also involves the definition of a methodology and a terminology,
or yet, the adoption of *epistemic agreements* to solve a lack of
consensus caused, in most part, by language differences. We can see
those efforts in publications like Key Concepts[^2], the dictionary[^3],
in the ICOFOM Study Series (ISS), and before that, in Museological
Working Papers (MuWoP). The theoretical Museology discussed in those
publications, built a foundation utilizing the specific terms
"musealia", "museality" and "musealization", introduced by Stránský in
the 1960s (Brulon Soares, 2018). Peter van Mensch (apud Cury, 2020)
understands these terms as a conceptual triad, the basic structure where
museological theory is sustained.

Starting from the theoretical foundation laid by Zbynek Stránský -
expanded by Peter Van Mensch (1992) - on the relationship between theory
and practice in Museology, we propose to analyze the processes that
compose the musealization chain of the Indian Museum of Rio de Janeiro,
based on Stránský’s theoretical perspective of selection, thesaurization
and presentation.

The Indian Museum was founded in 1953 by the anthropologist Darcy
Ribeiro and has been attached to the National Foundation of the Indian
(FUNAI) since 1967. This museum represents a milestone for anthropology
and museology in Brazil, because it is the first ethnographic museum
holding a collection entirely dedicated to the indigenous peoples of
Brazil.

Created at a time when European ethnographic museums valued the
ethnographic object as "testimonials", the Indian Museum, like the
Museum of Man (*Musée de l’Homme*) in Paris, created by Paul Rivet and
Georges Henri Rivière, shared the same theoretical line. Although
inspired by the model of these French researchers, the approach of Darcy
Ribeiro differed in his conception of and other particularities about
the objects (and subjects) between these two museums, and also in their
scientific methodology. For Edgardo Lander (2005), the museums were
configured as power instances, part of the Eurocentric political project
for the colonization of the "other", resulting in racialized knowledge
production and generic and stereotyped representations of indigenous
people in museums. Stuart Hall (2007) reminds us that stereotyping is an
evident sign of symbolic violence and occurs where inequalities in power
relations persist.

Brazilian indigenous history is full of complex events that cannot be
explained here in detail, however, we can point out that it was marked
by an unequal and violent relationship between Indians and Europeans. In
the beginning, the Indians were turned into slaves, serving the
entrepreneurs of the Portuguese Empire and the colony settled in Brazil
under the responsibility of the Jesuits. Subsequently, from the 18th
century onwards, the focus of this interest shifted to indigenous
territories and at least since 1960, to the soil of these territories
(Cunha, \[1992\] 2012). The inexorable march of civilization translated
into agricultural, military, pastoral and extractive "expansion fronts"
(Ribeiro, \[1970\] 2017 & Gleizer Ribeiro, \[1983\] 2009) at different
times in the history of contact, created the official and adverse
narrative of the indigenous peoples showing them as "violent savages"
and "enemies of progress". In 1910, in the Republic’s early years, the
Service for the Protection of Indians and the National Workers Location
(SPILTN) was created by and functioned under the responsibility of
Marshall Cândido Rondon, with positivist and assimilationist ideological
bases, placing the Brazilian Indians under the tutelage of the State.
Modified to Indian Protection Service (SPI) in 1934, the federal agency
remains a laic institution with the following purposes (to name a few):
allocate the Indians to their territories, guarantee their physical
survival and make the Indians gradually adopt "civilized" habits. The
SPI lasted until 1967, when the National Indigenous Foundation (FUNAI)
was created, changing its statute, but not leaving aside the tutelary
role for the Indians by the Brazilian State and the responsibility for
the demarcation of their territories. According to the anthropologist
João Pacheco de Oliveira (2014), the tutelage promoted by the Brazilian
State was configured as a practice of domination, full of paradoxes; at
the same time this mechanism, while guaranteeing protection laws that
benefit the indigenous and their traditional territories, also created
repression.

In the early 2000’s, the Indian Museum adopted a new methodology of
"partnership" with anthropologists to develop exhibitions (Couto, 2012),
that significantly affects the musealization chain. The first exhibition
in this participatory model was "Time and Space in Amazon: The Wajãpi
tribe" inaugurated on March 22^nd,^ 2002, curated by anthropologist
Dominique Gallois, who had worked with the Wajãpi tribe, from Amapá
(state of the north region of Brazil) many years earlier. The
musealization chain, as mentioned before, understood here by Stránský’s
model which contains the steps of selection, hence, the basic theory
that would allow the identification of the "museality potential" in
objects, removing them from their original situation towards a new
reality; thesaurization, that would be the process where the object is
identified and inserted into a documentary system; and presentation, the
process through which a collection acquires sense, making it accessible
and transmitting its values to an audience (Stránský, 1974).

For this exhibition, approximately 300 objects were produced by the
Wajãpi, spread across all 13 villages in the state of Amapá. With this
practice, new knowledge was produced, and some museum procedures
transformed. The selection and acquisition of the objects, for example,
are no longer mediated by anthropologists as a result of their fieldwork
but made by direct contact with the Wajãpi tribe. Before being stored to
be preserved, all items were inserted into a documentation system. The
indigenous knowledge about the objects was indispensable for
musealization, since the entire collection acquired came qualified with
all the information related to the ethnographic objects, such as what
materials the objects are made of, techniques, authorship, etc. The
objects were classified according to the Dictionary of Indigenous Crafts
created by the anthropologist Berta Ribeiro in 1988 and by the
institution\’s thesaurus, created in 2006. In this way, the museum
restores to the indigenous people a right to speak on behalf of their
own cultural heritage even outside the village. Their knowledge
prevailed over the specialist knowledge of the anthropologist and
museologist, inverting the specialist\’s logic (Brulon & Guedes, 2019).
In this context, we intend to discuss using post-colonial authors,
museologists and anthropologists, who research and debate about
indigenous presence and participation in museums, analyzing how
indigenous peoples contribute to the value attribution of ethnographic
objects.

This experience of indigenous participation in the Indian Museum would
be part of a methodological exercise of decolonization inherent in
experimental museology and what we called the chain of
ethnomusealization. Experimental museology, as a reflective methodology,
encourages different actors, from different social or ethnic groups, to
combine theory and practice through museological experimentation. The
social groups involved are led to think about their own experiences in
the construction of musealization, based on their own categories and
identities (Brulon, 2019). The ethnomusealization ritual involves shared
knowledge, combining theory with museological praxis with indigenous
subjects elevated to the role of protagonists in the production of their
own meanings and narratives, having their productions recognized by
authorship, as producers of musealia, and consequently attributing their
own values of museality to these objects. The museum would become,
according to Stránsky\’s theory, a methodological "laboratory" (Dólak,
2017; Brulon, 2017), where the condition of museality of the "musealized
thing" lies. The Indian Museum would no longer be perceived as a center
for knowledge dissemination, but a "contact zone" (Clifford, 1997), a
place where different cultures can meet and something new starts are
collectively built to be transmitted.

## References

- Abreu, R. Tal Antropologia, qual museu? (2007). In: R. Abreu; M.
  Chagas & M. Sepúlveda dos Santos. (Eds.). *Museus, coleções e
  patrimônios: narrativas polifônicas*. Rio de Janeiro: Garamond
  Universitária, 2007, pp.138-178.
- Brulon, B. & Guedes, L. (2019). Four Waurá masks in the Indian Museum:
  a decolonial way to conservation practice and theory. In: F. Mairesse
  & R. F. Peters. (Eds.). *What is the essence of conservation?* Paris:
  ICOFOM/ICOM, 1, 32-38.

- Brulon Soares, B. (2017). Provocando a museologia: o pensamento
  geminal de Zbyněk Z. Stránský e a Escola de Brno. *Anais do Museu
  Paulista*. São Paulo: Museu Paulista, 25(1), 403-425.

- Brulon Soares, B. (2018). Passagens da Museologia: a musealização como
  caminho. *Museologia e Patrimônio*: Rio de Janeiro, v.11, n. 2,
  pp.189-210.

- Brulon Soares, B. (2019). Museus, patrimônios e experiência criadora:
  ensaio sobre as bases da Museologia Experimental. *Museologia e
  Patrimônio*: Leiria, 1, 199-231.
- Carneiro da Cunha, M. (2012). *Índios no Brasil*. São Paulo:
  ClaroEnigma, 2012.

- Clifford, J. (1997). Museums as contact zones. *Routes: Travel and
  translation in the late twentieth century*. Cambridge: Harvard
  University Press, 188-219.

- Couto, I. (2012). A política institucional e o trabalho curatorial na
  montagem da exposição ’Tempo e Espaço no Amazonas: os Wajãpi’. In: M.
  X. Cury & C. Vasconcellos (Eds.). *Questões indígenas e museus:
  debates e possibilidades***.** São Paulo: ACAM Portinari/Museu de
  Arqueologia e Etnologia da Universidade de São Paulo/Secretaria de
  Estado da Cultura (SEC), 90-95.

- Cury, M.X. (2020). Metamuseologia - reflexividade sobre a tríade
  musealia, musealidade e musealização, museus etnográficos e
  participação indígena. *Museologia & Interdisciplinaridade*: Brasília,
  9(17), 129-146.

- Dolák, J. (2017). O museólogo Zbyněk Zbyslav Stránský -- Conceitos
  básicos. In: B. Brulon & A. Baraçal. *Stránský: uma ponte Brno -
  Brasil*. Paris: Icofom, 178-187.

- Gleizer Ribeiro, B. (2009). *O índio na história do Brasil*. São
  Paulo: Global Editora.

- Hall, S. 2016. *Cultura e representação*. Rio de Janeiro: Editora
  PUC-Rio.

- Lander, E. (Ed.). (2005). Ciências Sociais: saberes coloniais e
  eurocêntricos**.** *A colonialidade do saber: eurocentrismo e ciências
  sociais - Perspectivas latino-americanas*. Buenos Aires: 8-23.

- van Mensch, P. (1992). *Towards a Methodology of Museology***.** *PhD
  Thesis*. Zágreb: University of Zagreb.

- Pacheco de Oliveira, J. (2014). Pacificação e tutela militar na gestão
  de populações e territórios. *Mana*, 20(1), 125-161.
- Ribeiro, D. (2017). *Os índios e a civilização*. São Paulo: Global
  Editora.

- Stránský, Z. Z. (1974). *Education in Museology*. Brno: Museological
  Papers V, Supplementum 2.

[^1]: Data retrieved by the brazilian Federal Council of Museology (COFEM) in: http://cofem.org.br/legislacao\_/formacao/

[^2]: Cf. Desvallés, A. & Mairesse, F. (2010) Key concepts of Museology. Paris: Armand Collin.

[^3]: Cf. Desvallés, A. & Mairesse, F. (2011) Dictionnaire encyclopédique de muséologie. Paris: Armand Colin.
