---
title: "Through the eyes of the mannequins: How do we see us?"
authors: [{name:"Héctor Valverde Martínez", institution:"Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México – Mexico City, Mexico"}]
---

The National museum has been a construction of the hegemonic powers that
pretend to legitimize and position its vision of reality as the reality
of the peripheries, writes cultural critic Terry Eagleton (2000). During
its history, the museum has presented, through a catalogue of the
plundered artifacts, peripheral groups as extravagant and exotic, as
well as confirming the technological, artistic, and intellectual
superiority of the hegemonic groups.

In addition to the above, the museum used to have a symbolic function of
triumph over the alien other that in the manner of a trophy was inserted
in an exclusive space to be studied (Jiménez-Blanco, 2014). These other
spaces of representation had a mission and rules of their own that
differed from those spaces dedicated to the artistic and cultural
production of the hegemonic West.

This way of understanding the other went from giving symbolic weight to
the objects themselves by their representations linked to their origins
and their demonstration of territorial, economic and symbolic power
exerted over the exotic others (Bourdieu, 2012), to prioritizing the
knowledge that was deposited by their communities and the appreciation
of the objects of a collection or exhibition from their aesthetical
values on the same level as the Western ones.

This text will analyse the manner in which the museum has changed the
ways of comprehending, \[re\]presenting and establishing a dialogue with
the Mexican original cultures and, therefore, with ourselves, from an
analysis of the mannequins in the ethnographic rooms of the National
Museum of Anthropology in Mexico City.

## The heritage of colonial museums

We can trace the history of the modern museum from the collection and
the accumulation of objects (such as war trophies and church treasures)
preserved in the *studiolos* and chambers of wonders of the sixteenth
century as its direct predecessor. Yet it is only in the eighteenth
century and the Enlightenment, linked to encyclopedism and the
preponderance of reason, that first the public museums (to be
consolidated in the nineteenth century) appeared, together with
libraries, archives, and universities, to respond to the democratization
ideals in Western societies (Jiménez-Blanco, 2014).

The word museum is rooted in such a way that it automatically refers to
imaginaries in which different populations sought to replicate the
museum model, and for a long time its relevance in different contexts
was not questioned; so, following the trail of museums in Mexico, the
first modern museums that arrived in 1825 can be recognized as a legacy
(Avila et al., 2018) of illustrated modernity.

This illustrated museum was accompanied by two *cuasi perse* elements:
its space, understood as a container, and its collection, which is
tacitly contemplated as permanent, immutable and sacred (Ávila et
Padilla., 2016). It is in this way of understanding the museum that the
institution gave a symbolic weight to the objects by what it used to
represent about their origin that demonstrated the power that the
hegemonic groups exert over the dominated territorial, economic and
cultural indigenous groups (Bourdieu, 2012).

Mexican museums were born in this context and were used to demonstrate
the superiority of the hegemonic groups by showing the natives as
exotic, primitive and needy social groups to be saved from their own
savagery. The museum became a religious sanctuary to the structured way
of thinking of Western societies that preserved the ideological values
that constructed the imaginary of superiority.

Through generations these knowledge temples, controlled by conservative
groups (Bourdieu, 2012), tried to maintain the museum as above, but they
did not realize that this statism that they watched no longer existed
because the museum is a living entity which adapts its needs to the
present in a cultural, economic, social, educational and technological
context (Spiridon & Sandu, 2016), but it happens so slowly that is
almost imperceptible.

## How we see them

As mentioned above, the National Museum of Anthropology (MNA) continued
the tradition of making museums under the illustrated scientistic ideal
of the need to save the past, study the other and explain the world from
a hegemonic institutionalized point of view.

Heir to the National Museum, located in Moneda Street 13 in the center
of Mexico City, the MNA, along with other non-less important museums
such as the National Museum of History and the Museum of Modern Art, was
part of the modernizing imaginary of that time, committed to showing the
world how Mexican society was starting a process of modernization. Thus
its construction is the political decision to show the progress of the
modern world over the \"savage\" world of the communities that
traditionally used to be and still are considered exotic.

The lack of great renowned artists such as Michelangelo, El Greco,
Velázquez, Van Gogh, etc., was the reason that it was decided to glorify
the Mexican past by representing the dead, that is, the pre-Hispanic
civilizations, becoming the temple by which the glorious past would
approve the identity of the Mexican heirs as inheritors of the "cosmic
race" of which Vasconcelos famously wrote.

However, it was still pending to represent the direct heirs, those who
were considered the ballast of modern society, and that is why, during
the construction works of the MNA, the architect Mario Vázquez set out
to work with delegations of the ethnic groups that would be represented
in that space (Vela y Vela, 2015). Despite all the reflection around
museums, he maintained the nineteenth century tradition of making
museums, and the ethnographic halls on the top floor of the museum
became a kind of cabinet of curiosities of the twentieth century. The
MNA was created, then, as an ode to the past and a showcase of the
exotic other.

This leads me to analyse what happens to the curatorial and museographic
displays of the ethnographic halls in the MNA. To do that I will draw on
the devices used to represent the living indigenous groups that inhabit
the regions where the great native peoples once were. The analysis of
the mannequins and the reading that can be given to them speak to the
relationship that the Mexican State has with the true indigenous groups
that still live apart from the nonverbal communication tenet made by
Knapp, Hall & Horgan (2014).

The deep layer of Mexican culture constitutes a mysterious and complex
Mexico (Tardieu, 2015); however, as recorded in numerous academic
documents, reports of international organizations and press releases,
the Mexican State maintains a complicated relationship with traditional
peoples. For some sectors indigenous communities result in a drag on the
developmentist plans of industrialized economies, which claim that
indigenous people do not bring wealth and so, to them, a total
integration of indigenous people into the dynamics of the developed
world is the preferable solution.

Thus, Mexico continues a positivist view of Vasconelo’s cosmic race
ideology at the State level. This view is manifested in the ethnographic
halls of the MNA, in which indigenous integration sought to leave behind
the witness of its exotic, alien, premodern symbols with a system of
codes, values and symbolic constellations to somehow give rise to the
program of factual development.

Yet, as Vasconcelos himself mentioned, the heritage of the great
cultures was not going to save the current Indians from the end of their
cycle; they had instead to leave their "savagery" behind to be modern
men, women and children. All that would be the record of their passage
through these lands.

Regardless of whether these peoples would disappear or not, the Mexican
state decided to take advantage of the curiosity generated by ancient
civilizations and their legacy in the modern Western world, so that
exoticism of the indigenous and the original cultures turned out to be
the perfect showcase for the world to turn its sight to Mexico. Although
this display was intended to position Mexico as a developed country, the
exported product was not Mexican industry but its colorful and
mysterious roots.

In the history of Mexican exhibitions and those in which Mexico has a
presence since the late nineteenth century, and especially from the
middle of the last century, the "Mexican" is the colorful, the exotic
and the old, as we can witnes in the pavilions of Mexico in the
Universal Exhibitions of Paris in 1889, Montreal in 1967, San Antonio in
1968 and Osaka in 1970 (Garza, 2019), as well as the international
exhibitions *Aztecs* and *Mayans: Endless Time*, among others that
continued presenting an exotic Mexico.

Thus, in this period of Mexican museum history, the montages were
intended to be colorful, showing the exotic; in the end, museum
institutions were not interested in showing modern Mexico or a dialogue
between modernity and the past. Their main purpose was to show the deep
Mexico of Bonfil Batalla, the monolithic figures of the ancient gods,
the restaurant clicking on an almost performative staging of the flyers
of Papantla. The presentation of traditional artisanal processes
conflicted with the industrial processes of the developed countries. But
above all, the musealizing fetish led to containing the \"other\" inside
a glass case, almost caged, as in a kind of static human zoo that has
become a constant of ethnographic museums whose history is entwined in
processes of violence and unequal relations of power (Rozental and
Rufer, 2016).

The arrangement of devices to bring to presence the subjects spoken of
in the curatorial discourse of the ethnographic halls of the MNA present
an indigenous archetype; that is, a group of people in submissive
presence with the direction of their eyes to the ground, in a clear
posture of inferiority, in which they are presented doing their daily
activities in their \"habitats\", in contrast to the superiority it
evokes in those who can observe the scene mounted in the museum.

Despite having included the representatives of traditional peoples, the
vision of the working group under which work was produced was that of
the Western present, in which the contemplation of the other was
promoted in a remote space or time, which resulted in comparisons that
somehow served to justify the superiority of the person who narrated the
story, whose voice is often hidden so as not to interfere with the
fictions that unfold in the viewer (Jiménez-Blanco, 2014), even
rendering invisible others who might be equally uncomfortable, as is the
case of Afro-descendants in Mexico, who in the narratives of museum
spaces are rarely represented.

## Conclusion

Social changes have influenced new ways of seeing, understanding and
relating to the world, so there has been a shift in the conditions of
\[re\]presentation of the binomial "the same and the other" which seeks
to produce it on an equal footing, breaking the almost religious
conviction of the culturally appropriate from a European-Western
ethnocentrism, the product of an awareness by excluded groups that have
taken a critical perspective (Jiménez-Blanco,2014).

For several years since its opening, the MNA continued presenting a
universal encyclopedic point of view, but according to the new spirit of
the modern times, it has changed the manner of \[re\]presenting
indigenous groups, dignifying them and not presenting them as inferior
to urbanized groups.

## References

- Ávila & Padilla. (2016). Apuntes sobre el Proceso Museal. La
  exposición como archivo en proceso. *ICOFOM Study Series*, 44, 47 -
  55.
- Ávila et. al. (2018). Towards a poetic of the needs. *ICOFOM Study
  Series*, 46, 308 - 312.

- Bourdieu, P. (2012). Intelectuales, Política y Poder. Eudeba

- Eagleton, T. (2001). La idea de Cultura. Una mirada política sobre los
  conflictos culturales. Paidós

- Garza, D. (2019). Arquitectura e integración plática. Los pabellones
  mexicanos en Bruselas 58, Montréal 67 y Osaka 70. Presentation at
  *International Colloquium Historias de las exposiciones en México:
  Instituciones, circuitos y discursos curatoriales (1946 -- 1968)* May
  22 -- 23. UNAM. Mexico

- Jiménez-Blanco, M. (2014). Historia del Museo en Nueve conceptos.
  Cátedra. España

- Knapp, Hall, & Horgan. (2014). Nonverbal communication in human
  interaction. Wadsworth Cengage Learning, Boston

- Ortíz, J. (2015). Museos del Instituto Nacional de Antropología e
  Historia. *Chaski*. Nueva Época, vol. 1

- Rozental y Rufer. (2016). Río Congo: El corazón de las tinieblas en el
  Museo Nacional de Antropología. March 8, 2020. In *Horizontal*.
  Retrieved from
  [https://horizontal.mx/rio-congo-en-el-museo-nacional-de-antropologia/](https://horizontal.mx/rio-congo-en-el-museo-nacional-de-antropologia/).

- Spiridon & Sandu. (2016). Museums in the Life of the Public.
  *International Journal of Conservation Science*. Jan-Mar 2016, Vol. 7
  Issue 1, p87-92. 6p.

- Tardieu, J. (2015). El negro y la "raza cósmica" de José Vasconcelos
  (1925). Boletín *Americanista*.

- Vela y Vela. (2015). Charlas con la Museografía. Memoria museológica y
  museográfica de Mario Vázquez Ruvalcaba. Rubmont Ediciones.