---
title: "Metamuseology, Museology and decolonization – indigenous people and museums in Brazil"
authors: [{name:"Marília Xavier Cury", institution:"Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology of the University of São Paulo – São Paulo, Brazil"}]
---

The decades after the 1970’s have been marked by identity-recognition
demands and civil rights gains, as well as breakthroughs in the social
sciences and humanities that have a deep effect on Museology and museums
(Zavala, 2013). On one hand, post-colonialism has an impact on the basic
and applied research affecting museums. On the other hand,
decolonization shifts attention from colonialist and hegemonic outlooks
to the rights of several groups to their own memory and therefore to
musealization.

This period has led to the production of documents by the International
Council of Museums (ICOM) that remain reference documents today:
Declaration of Santiago (Chile, 1972), Declaration of Quebec (Canada,
1984) and Declaration of Caracas (Venezuela, 1992).

Ecomuseums, museum houses, neighborhood museums, local museums, school
museums, community museums and other manners of organizing museums have
sprung up in the decolonial environment through the introduction of new
practices founded on participation and self-representation. Cooperation
initiatives create the International Movement for a New Museology
(MINOM) in 1985. Within the framework of New Museology, grassroot
movements give rise to other museologies that value the protagonism,
sovereignty and autonomy of social groups -- Social Museology,
Indigenous Peoples Museology, Affirmative Museology (Santos, 2017), as
well as Sociomuseology, a branch of sociology that opposes orthodox
museology (Carvalho, 2015) and Critical Museology (Lorente, 2020). Both
of these challenge colonialism and hegemony at museums, a critical
outlook also shared with museum studies.

The civil rights demands of the indigenous peoples of America have
become public policies which, as such, directly affect the
representation of the original peoples in museums. Two paradigmatic
initiatives were the following: in the United States the Native American
Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAPGRA) was introduced in 1990
setting museum policies with respect to the original peoples of the
continent and fostered the creation of the National Museum of the
American Indian, with the participation of indigenous peoples. In
Canada, the Assembly of First Nations (AFN) was created. In 1988, George
Erasmus, then the leader of the AFN, opened "Preserving our Heritage: A
Working Conference for Museums and First Peoples" in Ottawa, after
protests against The Spirit Sings exhibition. In 1992, Turning the Page:
Forging New Partnerships Between Museums and First Peoples *-* Task
Force on Museums and First Peoples was published being the outcome of a
partnership between the AFN and the Canadian Museum Association. Two
names in Canada and the USA out: (1) Michael Ames (1992), whose work
Cannibal Tours and Glass Boxes, The Anthropology of Museums is
representative of the new theoretical breakthroughs in Museology, and
(2) James Clifford (1997) who wrote Museums as contact zone.

In Brazil, with the Constitution in 1988, public policies began to focus
on the specific characteristics of indigenous peoples and as a result,
public authorities started to design and implement different health and
education policies to target them. The National Museum Policy (Brasil,
2003) offers an opportunity for the participation of different social
groups and the manifestation of different identities. The joint efforts
of the Minister of Culture and the Minister of Justice through the
Brazilian Institute of Museums (Ibram) created the Memory Location
Program (Brasil, 2017) to promote museological procedures in a broad
range of communities, among which include indigenous groups.

In order to collaborate with experiments and technologies that support
the formulation of public museum policies, Brazilian museological
centers (university and non-university) have been developing actions
with indigenous groups acording the interdisciplinarity and theoretical
and methodological milestones, such as collaboration, research-action,
ethnomuseology, interculturality, etc. (Cury, 2017b; Françozo, &
Broekhoven, 2017). The indigenization of museums particularly affects
traditional museums (for example, see Oliveira, Lima & Oliveira, 2020;
Roca, 2015a), with contributions both from collaboration (Roca, 2015b)
and research-action (Ávila Meléndez, 2015; Cury, 2019b), covering
actions, and relying on a collection management policy (Cury, 2016;
Roca, 2015b) and institutional policy discussions (Cury, 2019a, Cury,
2018, Roca, 2015a, Roca, 2015b). However, indigenization consists of
actions also understood by Indigenous Museology considering
self-management, and indigenous reflections and authorship (Afonso,
Oliveira & Damaceno, 2020; Campos, 2020, Carvalho, 2020; Oliveira *et
al*., 2020; Pereira, Melo & Marcolino, 2020) and by indigenous museums,
which are of great interest to Museology (Cury, 2020).

I present here an outlook on the issues that started to be addressed in
the 1970’s, continued to be discussed at the turn of the twenty-first
century and remain relevant now, contributing for the Brazilian
participation. My selection proposes topics for discussion under a range
of circumstances (traditional and indigenous peoples museums) to
contribute to museological theory and Metamuseology. The discussions
developed in this article will address the threefold concept of
Musealia, Museality and Musealization and heritage, both inside and
outside of the institutionalized museum, as proposed by Stránský, by
gathering indigenous people around a reflexive museology (Cury, 2020,
Ávila Meléndez, 2015).

Between Canada, USA and Brazil, we propose a discussion on
representation and self-representation, the sacred and human remains,
aiming to contribute to ethical issues that define the policy of
collection management, as a crossroads of indigenous *musealia* laden
with past and current museality and a musealization based on human
rights that we recognize that indigenous have.

In addition to the experiences of traditional museums, especially
archeology and ethnology, indigenous points of view will be treated,
especially present in their museums and in the museology they develop,
in the perspective of metamuseology - a museology looking at a museology
as a way of decolonization.

## References

- Afonso, L. D. C.; Oliveira, J. B. & Damaceno, H. C. (2020). Museu Akãm
  Orãm Krenak -- Terra Indígena Vanuíre. En M.X. Cury (Org.). *Museus
  etnográficos e indígenas : aprofundando questões, reformulando ações*
  (p. 66-75 ). São Paulo: SEC-SP, ACAM Portinari, Museu Índia Vanuíre,
  MAE-USP. DOI: https://doi.org/10.11606/9786599055706.
- Ames, M. M. (1992). *Cannibal tours and glass boxes: the anthropology
  of museums.* Vancouver: University of British Columbia.
- Ávila Meléndez, N. A. (2015). Ética y Reflexividad: Experiencias
  Museológicas Comunitarias en México. *ICOFOM Study Series*, 43b,
  25-36.

- Brasil. Ministério da Cultura. Portaria Nº 315, de 6 de setembro de
  2017.

- Brasil. Ministério da Cultura. *Política Nacional de Museus: memória e
  cidadania*. Brasília, 2003.

- Campos, J. S. B. (2020). A exposição Fortalecimento da Memória
  Tradicional Kaingang -- de Geração em Geração. En M.X. Cury (Org.).
  *Museus etnográficos e indígenas : aprofundando questões, reformulando
  ações* (p. 89-96). São Paulo: SEC-SP, ACAM Portinari, Museu Índia
  Vanuíre, MAE-USP. DOI: https://doi.org/10.11606/9786599055706.

- Carvalho, A. (2015). Decifrando Conceitos em Museologia: Entrevista
  com Mário Caneva Moutinho. *Museologia & Interdisciplinaridade*, 4(8),
  252-269.

- Carvalho, J. (2020). As memórias e os lugares: território, identidade
  étnico-cultural e museus indígenas. En M.X. Cury (Org.). *Museus
  etnográficos e indígenas : aprofundando questões, reformulando ações*
  (p. 156-173). São Paulo: SEC-SP, ACAM Portinari, Museu Índia Vanuíre,
  MAE-USP. DOI: https://doi.org/10.11606/9786599055706.

- Clifford, J. (1997). Museums as contact zone. En J. Clifford. *Routes:
  travel and translation in the late twentieth century* (pp. 188-219).
  Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

- Cury, M. X. (2020). Metamuseologia: Reflexividade sobre a tríade
  musealia, musicalidade e musealização, museus etnográficos e
  participação indígena. *Museologia & Interdisciplinaridade*, 9(17),
  129-146.

- Cury M. X. (2019a). The sacred in museums, the Museology of the sacred
  ¬ the spirituality of indigenous people. *ICOFOM Study Series*, 47,
  89-104.

- Cury M. X. (2019b). Museu e exposição -- O exercício comunicacional da
  colaboração e da descolonização com indígenas. En *Museu Goeldi: 150
  anos de ciência na Amazônia* (313-348). Belém: Museu Paraense Emílio
  Goeldi.

- Cury M. X. (2018). La museología y lo sagrado -- La resacralización
  del museo. En F. Mairesse (Ed.). *Museology and the sacred*. (60-64).
  Materials for the discussion. Paris: Icofom.

- Cury M. X. (2017a). Circuitos museais para a visitação crítica:
  descolonização e protagonismo indígena. *Ritur*, 7, 87-113.

- Cury M. X. (2017b). Lições Indígenas para a descolonização dos Museus
  -- Processos comunicacionais em discussão. *Cadernos Cimeac*, 7(1),
  184-211.

- Cury M. X. (2016). Direitos indígenas no museu -- Novos procedimentos
  para uma nova política: a gestão de acervos em discussão --
  Introdução. En M.X. Cury (Org.). *Direitos indígenas no museu -- Novos
  procedimentos para uma nova política: a gestão de acervos em
  discussão* (12-22). São Paulo: Secretaria da Cultura: ACAM Portinari:
  Museu de Arqueologia e Etnologia da Universidade de São Paulo.

- Françozo, M. & Broekhoven, L. (2017). Dossiê "Patrimônio indígena e
  coleções etnográficas". *Boletim do Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi:
  Ciências Humanas*, 12(3), 709-711.

- Lorente, J. P. (2020). El giro crítico en la Historia del Arte y en la
  Museología ante el reto de musealizar in situ el street art. En E.D.
  Oliveira, M.F.M. Couto & M. Malta (Org.). *Histórias da arte em
  museus* (11-23). Rio Books.

- Oliveira, A. A.; Lima, G. L. & Oliveira, I. S. C. (2020). A
  experiência do Museu Índia Vanuíre no processo da exposição
  autonarrativa com curadoria Kaingang Fortalecimento da Memória
  Tradicional Kaingang de Geração em Geração. En M.X. Cury (Org.).
  *Museus etnográficos e indígenas : aprofundando questões, reformulando
  ações* (p. 116-122). São Paulo: SEC-SP, ACAM Portinari, Museu Índia
  Vanuíre, MAE-USP. DOI: https://doi.org/10.11606/9786599055706.

- Oliveira, T.; Marcolino, C.; Marcolino, G. A.; Marcolino, C. A. &
  Cezar, S. N. L. (2020). Guarani Nhandewa: museu das lembranças e dos
  sentimentos -- Aldeia Nimuendaju. En M.X. Cury (Org.). *Museus
  etnográficos e indígenas : aprofundando questões, reformulando ações*
  (p. 50-65). São Paulo: SEC-SP, ACAM Portinari, Museu Índia Vanuíre,
  MAE-USP. DOI: https://doi.org/10.11606/9786599055706.

- Pereira, D. J. L.; Melo, S. E. M.; Marcolino, I. L. M. (2020). Museu
  Worikg -- Kaingang, T.I. Vanuíre. En M.X. Cury (Org.). *Museus
  etnográficos e indígenas : aprofundando questões, reformulando ações*
  (p. 85-88). São Paulo: SEC-SP, ACAM Portinari, Museu Índia Vanuíre,
  MAE-USP. DOI: https://doi.org/10.11606/9786599055706.

- Roca, A. (2015a). Acerca dos processos de indigenização dos museus:
  uma análise comparativa. *Mana*, 21(1), p. 123-155.

- Roca, A. (2015b). Museus indígenas na Costa Noroeste do Canadá e nos
  Estados Unidos: colaboração, colecionamento e autorrepresentação.
  *Revista de Antropologia*, 58, 117-142.

- Santos, S. S. (2017). *Ecomuseus e Museus Comunitários no Brasil:
  estudo exploratório de possibilidades museológicas*. Mestrado
  (Museologia) - Universidade de São Paulo.

- *Turning the page: Forging new partnerships between museums and First
  Peoples - Task Force on Museums and First Peoples*. (1992). Ottawa,
  Canada: Assembly of First Nations, Canadian Museum Association.

- Zavala. L. (2013). *Antimanual del museólogo. Hacia uma museologia de
  la vida cotidiana*. México, UAM: INHAH: Conaculta.