---
title: "A Cultural Heritage between two forces: Who shall preserve the Parthenon Marbles?"
authors: [
  {
    name: "Ana Carolina Gelmini de Faria",
    institution: "Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS) – Porto Alegre, Brazil"
  },
  { 
		name: "Kimberly Terrany Alves Pires",
		institution: "Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS) - Porto Alegre, Brazil"
	}
]
---

Several collections that represent the history of humanity had arisen
from raids and spoils of war that were later incorporated into museums.
Objects have been protected through time and human action by
institutions that have preserved, researched, and made those collections
worldwide known. This investigation proposes an immersion into the
museological debates covering repatriation, identifying direct relations
to the concept of museality. For this analysis, we have taken as our
study object the collection of the Parthenon Marbles, which the dispute
between the British Museum (England), the current holder of the
collection, and the one which claims its ownership, the Acropolis Museum
(Greece), not only involves the material and economic value of the
objects but also their significance that can create different
discourses, depending on the institution holding the collection.

According to Waldisa Guarnieri (Guarnieri, 2010), we only preserve what
has a value, one could say social value, stemmed from some kind of
collective consciousness. For the author, “Cultural Patrimony is a
question of historic consciousness” (Guarnieri, 2010, p.121). For that
matter, museums have become responsible for the creation of discourses,
binding them to the materiality via musealization process, conjectured
by Desvallées and Mairesse (2013, p. 57) as an operation “[\...\] of
material and conceptual extraction of something from its natural or
cultural original environment, granting to it a museal status”, in
other words, a musealia - object of a museum. The Museum works in
changing an object’s status, and according to Stransky (1970 as cited in
Desvallées & Mairesse, 2013, p.57) “\[\...\] a museum object is not
only an object in a museum”. Therefore, musealization traces the moment
of passage to a new cultural reality, enhancing new narratives.

From the decolonial perspective, repatriation allows nations that have
lost their patrimonies to create their narratives of world history,
“[\...\] the post-colonial perspective stresses critics and
deconstruction of some naturalized narratives, also in the cultural
heritage sphere” (Costa, 2018, p.101). Many cases result in
repatriation or restitution requests that, in the majority of instances,
involve governments and museums.

The protection of cultural assets removed illegally from their original
context is an issue first discussed in the Convention of Haia in 1899,
followed by the conventions of 1907 and 1957. A significant contribution
of those events was the comprehension that the destruction of cultural
assets owned by any nation constituted havoc to the whole cultural
heritage of humanity, due to the conception that each population
contributes to world culture in a specific way. (Convention of Haia,
1954).

Let us emphasize that in 1970 a new policy for the protection of
patrimony fastened parameters and instruments to protect cultural assets
during periods of peace. One of the goals of UNESCO Convention in 1970
was the creation of mechanisms to prohibit and thwart the illegal
import, export, and conveyance of cultural patrimonies (General
Conference UNESCO, 1970). Later, the UNESCO Convention Concerning the
Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage took place in
1972. This one proposed the establishment of a system of international
cooperation, where the most industrialized countries would help those
still in development, so they could identify and preserve their natural
and cultural heritage by producing an international inventory of
cultural and natural patrimony of universal interest. Following this,
the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural
Property to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of
Illicit Appropriation was organized in which those jurisdictions bound
to UNESCO the possibility of requesting the return of collections that
have been removed from their original country.

Relevant to this discussion, the museums are agents of memory
preservation, thus in this overview about the Parthenon Marbles case, we
present the two safeguard institutions, both with different missions and
visions. The institution which claims back the heritage, the Acropolis
Museum, presents and proposes an exhibition that delineates the origins
of Greek national identity and ensures the depiction of the Parthenon
Marbles absence in the exposition. The institution recognizes the nation
by what is proper in its history, allowing the indication of the
singularities and, through this, the construction of collective
identities, defending the idea that each nation builds itself. On the
other hand, the institution that currently holds the collection, the
British Museum, proffers an encyclopedic collection discourse, as many
times found in museums from the XIX century, with a national approach
that seeks a universal aspect (Pomian, 1991).

According to British Museum contextualization, the permanence of this
collection is validated by a universal discourse that is still ratified
by the great number of visitors who view those objects. The British
Museum bestows a more traditional exhibition form, with cramped settings
and objects stripped of their context and original references. This
institution is based on the concept of world heritage which mostly
defends the protection of common interest objects. Some radical lines of
opinion defend the extinction of this kind of museum, alleging that they
are part of a group of institutions that reinforce the traditional model
of the national museums. The discussion leaves room for changes in the
museums studies field, with fewer iconoclast representations and the
opinion that it is not feasible to represent the whole history (Tostes,
2011).

When we step on the scenario brought by the Acropolis Museum, which
highlights the lack of spatial forms of the Marbles on the exhibition
context, it is possible to identify the value of those objects for the
construction of the greek national history. In that sense, to hold the
collection would mean to learn and to reconnect with the roots of greek
culture, since the marbles and the Parthenon Temple themselves had an
original function of transmitting messages thought the images depicted
on the panels. Therefore, its incompleteness shatters the significance
connected to the cultural good (Kynourgiopoulou, s.d.).

From the 1980s onwards, Greece has begun a worldwide campaign for the
return of the Parthenon Marbles. In 2012, demanding an international
range broadcast, the *Independent Voluntary Movement for the
Repatriation of the Looted Greek Antiquities *created a campaign
entitled *I Am Greek and I Want to Go Home*[^1]*.* The efforts of the
country stressed that the museal value would vary in accordance to the
institutional approach, as we can notice distinct interventions on the
representation of the same collection under whichever museal institution
holds it. In this case, for the British Museum, it traces the history of
humanity, and for the Acropolis Museum, it would be a reaffirmation of
national identity.

According to Marshall Sahlins (2003 as cited in Dohmann, 2013, p.36)
“no object at all, nothing is or has movement in human society, except
through the meanings that mankind attributes to it”. The Parthenon
Marbles, which used to be a structural part of an edifice for religious
worship, turned into fragmented pieces surrounded by values such as
authenticity, uniqueness, historicity.

The case presented is about the same collection comprehended by two
museological institutions with distinctive proposals. In this case,
there is no right interpretation, but contexts that ascribe different
meanings to the Parthenon Marbles. Stransky (1983 as cited in Brulon,
2017) stresses that more than point out the value of things, the
importance of the museal work is to understand the motivations behind
the acquirement of the value, since being under the condition of
musealia, they document a reality through another reality. Evidences
from the two institutions demonstrate that inside the musealization
chain, the process of identification of the “potential museality” in
the objects, the insertion of the object in the documental system of a
museum’s new reality, and the museologic communication (the way a
collection acquires meaning) would be distinctive from each other,
because, as according to Brulon (2017, p.414) “\[\...\] an object that
is thought a priori as holder of museality and selected according to its
potenciality based on existing values, \[can\] \[\...\] acquire new
values when communicated in a museologic discourse”.

Approaches to subjects associating cultural heritage domains, as well as
repatriation requests around the world, indicate how an emerging
movement can foster many debates. This way, future requests shall be
proposed by nations with a historical consciousness about their cultural
legacy, constraining collections policies of colonizer countries to
rethink their practices on a global scale. The contemporary demands
require from the museal field the development of museological thoughts
promoting social bonds, human rights, dialogue, institutional
cooperation, and strengthening constructive relations between
institutions and society.

## References

- Brulon, B. (2017). Provocando a Museologia: o pensamento geminal de
  Zbynek Z. Stránský e a Escola de Brno. *Anais do Museu Paulista*,
  403-425.
- Conferência Geral da UNESCO (1970). *Decreto do Governo n.26/85 de 26
  de Julho Convenção Relativa às Medidas a Adoptar para Proibir e
  Impedir a Importação, a Exportação e a Transferência Ilícitas da
  Propriedade de Bens Culturais*.

- Convenção de Haia (1954). *Convenção para a proteção dos bens
  culturais em caso de conflito armado*.

- Convenção para a proteção do Patrimônio Mundial, Cultural e Natural
  (1972). Paris.

- Costa, K. L. (2018). A quem pertence o patrimônio cultural?
  Propriedade em debate. *Tempos Históricos*, 100-119.

- Desvallées, A., & Mairesse, F. (2013). *Conceitos-chave de
  Museologia.* São Paulo: Comitê Brasileiro do Conselho Internacional de
  Museus: Pinacoteca do Estado de São Paulo: Secretaria de Estado da
  Cultura Armand Colin.

- Dohmann, M. (2013). *A experiência material: a cultura do objeto.* Rio
  de Janeiro: Rio Books.

- Guarnieri, W. R. (2010). Bem e patrimônio cultural. In M. C. Bruno,
  *Waldisa Rússio Camargo Guarnieri: textos e contextos de uma
  trajetória profissional* (pp. 119-122). São Paulo: Pinacoteca do
  Estado: Secretaria do Estado da Cultura: Comitê Brasileiro do Conselho
  Internacional de Museus.

- Kynourgiopoulou, V. (s.d.). National Identity Interrupted: The
  Mutilation of the Parthenon Marbles and the Greek Claim for
  Repatriation. *Contested Cultural Heritage Religion, Nationalism,
  Erasure, and Exclusion in a Global World*.

- Pomian, K. (1991). Musée, nation, musée national. *Le Débat*, 166-175.

- Tostes, V. L. (2011). Apresentação. Em A. M. Magalhães, & R. Z.
  Bezerra, *Museus Nacionais e os desafios do contemporâneo* (pp. 7-8).
  Rio de Janeiro: Museu Histórico Nacional.

[^1]: Watch the video on the link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7swmq0VROUk. Access on: Mar. 27