---
title: "Museological Myths of Decolonization and Neutrality"
authors: [{name: "Shikoh Shiraiwa", institution: "University of Helsinki – Finland"}, {name: "Olga Zabalueva", institution: "Linköping University – Sweden"}]
---

> *"To have no museum in today's circumstances is to admit that one is
> below the minimum level of civilisation required of a modern state"*
>
> (Hudson & Nicholls, 1985)

Museums are some of the most trusted public institutions in many
countries. Museum as institution is the "cultural product of western
history" (Wu, 2006, p. 6) that enforces the nation-state creed.
Consequently, imperial ideology and colonial practices have been
naturalized in present-day museums, continuing to preserve and
(re)construct cultural, social, political, economic, and aesthetic
hierarchies.

Museums absorbed diverse subject matter disciplines, such as
anthropology and ethnology, further solidifying their discriminatory
hierarchies, notably representing 'we' (as positive) and 'others' (as
negative) and the imagined genetic superiority of the European white
race. The same applied to art history, which favors Western aesthetics
and universalizes its dominance. Have those perspectives changed today?
If so, why do some cultural objects end up in an art museum and others
in ethnological, anthropological, and natural history museums? Why are
these museums separated in the first place? Who decides what is fine art
and what is not? Who creates the value of the cultural objects?

Museums today still represent global inequality of economic power,
sustaining the unending colonizers and colonized relations. This
relation is particularly visible in the current issue of restitution of
cultural materials.[^1] This paper addresses the colonial origin of the
museum and examines the questions "what is it really to decolonize the
museum?" and "were museums ever neutral?" We will also introduce briefly
two case studies: an experimental exhibition *Art of the Americas*
(2018)[^2] and another exhibition, opening in 2021, which will be
expanding the theme of *Art of the Americas* to the global scale.

## Heritage, Nation, and Coloniality of Knowledge

Museums are "part of the heritage of cultural colonialism" (Wu, 2006, p.
2) --- but they also were the tools of colonialism itself. The modern
museum was formed at the turn of the 19^th^ century, and, as many
scholars point out, it served as a mechanism to exercise new forms of
governmentality (cf. Bennett, 1995). The nineteenth-century museums
embodied the self-serving Enlightenment concept and used its symbolic
power to civilize and reorganize people by introducing specific
practices into the emerging public sphere. Coinciding with the emergence
of nation-states, national museums, especially museums of cultural
history, were responsible for creating the feeling of belonging to
"imagined communities" (Anderson, 2006). Staging a national history in
the museum simplified the complexity and ambiguity of the nation's past
and reduced the production of knowledge to one hegemonic narrative.
Coombes (1988) pointed out that colonial exhibitions in the 19^th^
century were constructing colonized subjects, reproducing them "in a
'safe', contained and yet accessible and supposedly open environment"
(p. 59). This practice has been adopted and naturalized universally even
to the present day, preserving the West-monopolized idea of high and
'civilized' (as well as 'civilizing') culture.

Museums both deal with different sorts of heritage and also *are*
heritage-making institutions themselves. Smith (2006) argued that
heritage is a performative "cultural practice, involved in the
construction and regulation of a range of values and understandings" (p.
11). She posited a 'hegemonic discourse' manipulating how we interpret
heritage, which "promoted a certain set of Western elite cultural values
as being universally applicable" and that "undermines alternative and
subaltern ideas about 'heritage'" (*Ibid.*). Furthermore, the separation
of tangible and intangible heritage also creates the division in class,
race, ethnicity, gender, and aesthetics favoring Western elite material
culture as *the* heritage over (often Non-Western) cultural and social
practices.

These unspoken hierarchies contribute to the idea of the museum as a
depository of material culture. The very materiality of museum objects
leads to another concept - one of the 'objectivity' of knowledge
produced by this institution and its neutral/scientific nature, whereas
oral history/storytelling, chanting/singing, dancing, and ritual were
considered as not belonging to Western cultural values (for example, on
the global level, from the very first museum definition by ICOM,
heritage was codified as "material evidence," and only in 2007 was the
notion of "tangible and intangible heritage" introduced[^3]). Also, the
very vocabulary includes a catch here: "to designate embodied knowledge
and practices 'intangible' is to define them by what they are *not* and
to maintain the primacy of tangibility as an organizing concept in
heritage theory and practice\" (Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, 2017, p. 75).

This power disbalance was addressed recently both by activists and
academic researchers, leading to the calls for decolonizing museums.

## What does it mean to decolonize the still-colonial institution?

Given the aforementioned critique, various studies were done on
'decolonizing' museums and exhibition narratives (cf. Tlostanova, 2017,
Kassim, 2020). As some researchers argue, many problematic decolonizing
efforts consist of inviting minority curators/scholars/educators to
produce exhibitions in the museum space or serve as consultants,
checking the 'inclusive' and 'diversity' boxes off the list while
preserving the *status quo* in power relations within our societies (cf.
Boast, 2011, Lynch, 2014).

Witcomb (2003) points out that the very 'political rationality' of the
museum uncovers its structural flaws; since museums in their
representation of colonial hierarchies are *putting on display* (often
unconsciously) problematic patterns and provoking calls for change from
communities and activist groups. In the disciplinary field, though, the
critique would not be possible without recent museological research,
starting from the new museology and the idea of the social
responsibility of museums.

The 'decolonization' discourse, however, becomes appropriated by the
academic discipline studying heritage as one of the current trends in
scholarship, alongside the 'digitization', 'Disneyfication', and all the
other ways of 'thinking with museums'. Rephrasing Audre Lorde's famous
quote (1984), the master's tools are not suitable to dismantle the
master's house; furthermore, we want to argue that this mode of
knowledge production reiterates the same hegemonic Western practices
that were lying in the foundation of both museums and academic
disciplines: it deprives the 'studied' subjects of their agency and
provides them with new hierarchies and classifications.

The second point which we want to address is one of neutrality and
objectivity.

There is an emerging movement in the museum and museum organizations
taking the role of social justice in human rights; stating that "museums
are not neutral" (e.g. Murawski, 2017). Museums, however, have never
been neutral. The institution itself embodies perpetuation of social,
cultural, racial, and ethnic inequalities while adding to complex social
and economic injustices on a global scale. The controversy between their
perceived 'neutrality' and the demands to decolonize the museum is
evidence of dynamic processes in the museum world.

## Case Studies

*Art of the Americas* was an experimental exhibition opened in March
2018 at the Max Chambers Library, University of Central Oklahoma (UCO),
USA. It was curated by one of the co-authors (Shikoh Shiraiwa). Shiraiwa
questioned the practice of dividing museum objects into different
academic disciplines and separate museums, especially fine art and
ethnological or archaeological artifacts. Therefore, he focused on
displaying diverse cultural objects altogether. For example, one of the
cases displayed a 20^th^-century American Taos painting, Mexican
festival masks, 9^th^-century Mayan clay figures, and a contemporary
African American painting side-by-side. The exhibition was based
entirely on the university's collections.

*Art of the Americas* encouraged the audience to see all the cultural
objects on equal footing. It was essential to ignore the monetary values
of the objects as those values, arguably, have been constructed from the
perspective of Western material culture and aesthetics. It also
questioned the idea of "fine art" and a Western concept of linear
history. Fine arts are often divided into 'eras' and 'styles,' such as
Renaissance, Impressionism, Avant-Garde, and so on, which became the
universal standard of history of art production. Classifying some
objects as 'fine art' indicates one aesthetics over others, notably
indicating one culture over others. *Art of the Americas* aimed to
deconstruct this practice.

In 2021, Shiraiwa is planning to visit UCO to co-curate a new
exhibition. This exhibition will expand *Art of the Americas* further,
to the global perspective, within the limitations of the UCO Art
Collections.

Continuing to experiment with new ideas and methods is a critical part
of \'decolonizing' the long-established imperial and colonial ideology
embedded into museum practice. This new exhibition aims to deconstruct
part of the museum's naturalized cultural hierarchies in a visible
manner to seek a better way to exhibit and narrate all the cultural
objects on equal footing.

## Concluding remarks

One cannot decolonize museums only by means of academic thought, as this
thought is based on the racist coloniality of knowledge. In our further
work we plan to apply the idea of Lurajane Smith regarding heritage as a
repeated performance to the repetitive performance of teaching and being
taught at the academic institution, arguing that academia is also a
heritage-making institution which preserves and reconstructs a certain
set of cultural and social perspectives as a universal standard. Our
inquiry considers how the decolonization discourse can be used as a
reflexive tool in both museology and museum practice without being
converted into the new 'hegemonic' system of knowledge.

## References

- Anderson, B. (2006). *Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin
  and Spread of Nationalism* (2^nd^ ed.). London: Verso.
- Bennett, T. (1995) *The Birth of the Museum: History, Theory,
  Politics*. London: Routledge.

- Boast, R. (2011). Neocolonial Collaboration: Museum as Contact Zone
  Revisited. *Museum Anthropology*, 34(1), 56--70.

- Coombes, A. (1988). Museums and the Formation of National and Cultural
  Identities. *Oxford Journals*, 11(2), 57-68.

- Hudson, K., & Nicholls, A. (Eds.). (1985). *The Directory of Museums &
  Living Displays* (3rd ed.). Palgrave Macmillan.

- Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, B. (2017). From Ethnology to Heritage: The Role
  of the Museum. In C. K. Dewhurst, P. Hall, & C. Seemann (Eds.),
  *Folklife and Museums: Twenty-First Century Perspectives* (pp.
  73--80). Lanham, Boulder, New York, London: Rowman & Littlefield.

- Lorde, A. (2007). The Master's Tools Will Never Dismantle the Master's
  House. 1984. In: *Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches* (pp.
  110--114). Berkeley, CA: Crossing Press.

- Lynch, B. (2014). "Whose cake is it anyway?": Museums, civil society
  and the changing reality of public engagement. In L. Gouriévidis
  (Ed.), *Museums and Migration: History, Memory, Politics* (pp.
  67--80). London & New York: Routledge.

- Murawski, M. (2017). *Museums are not neutral*. Retrieved May 1, 2018
  from
  [https://artmuseumteaching.com/2017/08/31/museums-are-not-neutral/](https://artmuseumteaching.com/2017/08/31/museums-are-not-neutral/)

- Smith, L. (2006). *Uses of Heritage*. London, UK: Routledge.

- Tlostanova, M. (2017). *Postcolonialism and Postsocialism in Fiction
  and Art: Resistance and Re-existence*. Palgrave Macmillan.

- Kassim, S. (2017). The Museum Will Not Be Decolonised. *Media
  Diversified*. Retrieved February 7, 2020 from
  [https://mediadiversified.org/2017/11/15/the-museum-will-not-be-decolonised/](https://mediadiversified.org/2017/11/15/the-museum-will-not-be-decolonised/)

- Witcomb, A. (2003). *Re-Imagining the Museum: Beyond the Mausoleum*.
  London & New York: Routledge.

- Wu, D. (2006). Cultural Hegemony in the Museum World. *INTERCOM
  Conference Papers*. Paris: ICOM.

[^1]: For example, the return of Benin Bronzes, the repatriations of  human remains in different contexts in the museum world, Sarr & Savoy's report ([http://restitutionreport2018.com](http://restitutionreport2018.com/)) etc.

[^2]: The exhibition aimed to engage the 'decolonizing museum' movement, deconstructing the museum and its naturalized/universalized imperial ideology and colonial practice.

[^3]: [http://archives.icom.museum/hist_def_eng.html](http://archives.icom.museum/hist_def_eng.html)
