---
title: "Deconstruction of Museum Landscape"
authors: [{name: "Liubov Petrunina", institution: "Independent museum consultant, PhD – Moscow, Russia"}]
---

Theses proposed for the 43^rd^ ICOFOM symposium transfer the horizon of
museological problems into the field of politics. This turns us away
from comprehending the problem situation we have in museums now.
However, it is obvious that the changing role of the museum in society
demands an analysis of the museum mission from a cultural standpoint,
not from a political one. It seems important to me to emphasize the
links between what we do with the heritage and how we talk about it. We
should be attentive and use correct terminology in this case. My over 30
years’ experience as a senior researcher in the State Tretyakov Gallery
as well as an experience of teaching in Moscow State Lomonosov
University prompts the relevance of such a statement.

The theme announced at the 43^rd^ symposium continues the line of
discussion that had begun during 40^th^ ICOFOM symposium in 2017. The
articles published in the 46^th^ volume of ISS after that symposium
reflect the huge range of museum thoughts concerning politics in the
museum field in different countries. And according to the opinion of the
guest issue editor, they do not clarify situation faced by many museums,
but rather raise even more questions (Mairesse 2018).

In the last two decades in Russia a scientific direction has arisen that
regards a museum as a *social* institution (Petrunina 1991, Aculych
2004q etc.). This point of view has been based on the deep historical
analysis of the process of organizing museums in our country. Thus, the
art collector’s movement that emerged in the 18^th^ century under the
influence of European Enlightenment ideas, of which Empress Catherine II
was a fan. Private collections of the nobility indicated their desire to
follow the Empress's fashionable example and served as a public evidence
of the owner.

In the second half of the 19^th^ century, after the reforms of Emperor
Alexander II which significantly changed the economic system of Russia,
we observe the increasing activity of various social groups. The new
class of industrialists and traders that established itself in the
economy came to the forefront of cultural life and *used museums to
demonstrate its significance in the society*. At that time such
museums as the Historical Museum in Moscow, the Ostroukhov Gallery and
the Moscow City Art Gallery of the Tretyakov brothers were founded.

In the last third of the 19^th^ century *zemstvos* appeared in the
cities as a form of urban local self-governance, and in this framework
numerous local cultural societies were organized. They in turn
accumulated various public initiatives of teachers, engineers, doctors,
merchants, etc. Societies of art amateurs appeared in Astrakhan',
Vladimir, Kazan', Saratov, Smolensk, Odessa, Kharkov, Novgorod
(Bityatskaya 1953, Pivnenko 1990, etc.), and on the basis of those
societies the new self-sufficient museums were founded. The emergence of
such a network of museums reflected the claims of these intellectual
groups to enhance their role in culture and society.

This pre-revolutionary network of museums had become the basis of the
state museum network in Soviet Russia. Unified in accordance with the
state demand and financed by the Ministry of Culture, the network of
local historical museums acquired uniformity in structure and thematics.
Museums started to play an educational and enlightening role for the
population and an ideological role for the ruling party nomenclature.

After the dismantling of the Soviet system in the 1990s, the diversity
of cultural life has reappeared. The changing social and economic
situation has entailed the increase in self-awareness of local
communities, so they have accepted responsibility to take part in the
museum activities. Along with the state and municipal museums, numerous
private museums of various subjects have been founded not only in both
capitals, but in the provinces as well.

During last two decades, museums working with "difficult themes" have
appeared. The most famous of these are the Museum of the History of the
GULAG in Moscow and the "Perm-36" Museum. They present the stories of
the destinies of 40 million Soviet people who suffered under the state
repressive system in the USSR for over 40 years. These State museums
arose under pressure from the Human Rights movement, Memorial Society,
and some projects such as "The Last Address" onto the governmental
structures.

In 1995, by the initiative of the Nobel Prize winner A.I. Solzhenitsyn,
who at that time returned to Russia, the House of Russians Abroad was
founded on the basis of Library No. 17 in Moscow. The activities of the
House were diverse: emigrants' descendants were invited to transfer
their ancestor's archives, which had been removed during the process of
forced emigration after 1917; some documents were purchased by the House
at auctions; numerous discussions, exhibitions, meetings, concerts,
films, etc., were organized. Under pressure from the House activities,
which had a great international public response, the Ministry of Culture
had to agree to the foundation of the Museum of Russians Abroad. In 2015
this Museum was opened in a special complex, combining the museum
building and the archive building (Moskvin V. 2015).

The appearance of such museums in Russia reflects processes similar to
those described in theses proposed for the 43^rd^ ICOFOM Symposium in
Canada. As we can see, such situations of public activities leading to
the organization of museums representing the interests of certain social
groups are not unique. They are repeated at different times in the
different countries. The problem should therefore be reformatted: can
such processes be considered as the decolonization of the cultural
field? I think, no, they cannot. First, the term decolonization has
enduring connotations in scientific discourse, and it is used by
political science to describe another group of events. Secondly, we
should use our own terminology for our description of cultural
processes. The way we describe the problem and terms we use are also
reflected in our social practices regarding tangible and intangible
heritage. Today in a multicultural society, various discourses can be
offered in discussing a problem. But the politically colored narrative
proposed for the 43^th^ ICOFOM Symposium introduces an element of
contention and aggressiveness into the field of culture, in opposition
to the goals of sustainable development of society. It is important not
only what we do with heritage, but also how we talk about it, how we
argue, and how we assess its value.

In the theses to the 43^th^ ICOFOM symposium, the questions were
formulated in the form of opposition. However, museums have already
gained the experience of otherness. Inclusion programs for people with
disabilities are available in many museums around the world. The
socialization of large groups of migrants is occurring through museums
in many countries---there are museums of migration in Italy, Germany,
Australia, Ireland. The adoption of otherness led to a democracy,
equality and sustainable development. In a multicultural society the
museum is the most important communication platform that can conduct
dialogue with any cultural community. During the symposium, we can
discuss the deconstruction of mainstream discourses in the museum field
rejecting hierarchy in the interpretation of heritage and using
discourse analysis of intangible heritage proposed, for example, by the
Australian researcher L. Smith.

The history of organizing museums in Russia reveals the instrumental
capabilities of museum which are used by different social and
professional groups to attain their goals within society. Such goals
might vary tremendously: from patriotic aims in the Museum of Russians
Abroad to technological goals oriented to developing strategy for
certain corporations. "A Corporate Museum helps us to find the answers
to construct the activity of concern in order to be useful for society
in the future", the chief of the company Avesta said at the
international conference of corporate museums in Russia (ICOM Russia
news 2015).

The major trend transforming museums today is a broad engagement of
local communities, volunteers, "friends of the museum" societies, and
sponsors in the museum's activities. It shows that now the activity of
the museum is not built around a museum object, but around a person's
activities. The analysis of the Materials for Discussion proposed for
the symposium in Kyoto assures us of this. Significant inclusion of
various social groups into the museum's sphere necessarily makes
heritage a subject of multilateral discussion of what values ​​and
meanings it gives birth to. Heritage includes an important process of
creative narratives helping us to comprehend our present through our
history. Heritage raises complex communication questions about the
transfer of knowledge and memory, allowing everybody to gain identity.

## References

- Aculych Е.М. (2004*). Muzey kak sotsialnyi institut* \[Museum as a
  Social Institution\]. Ph.D. (Sociology). Thesis. Retrieved on March
  14, 2019 from
  [http://www.dissercat.com/content/muzei-kak-sotsialnyi-institut\#ixzz5fj2mh2bC](http://www.dissercat.com/content/muzei-kak-sotsialnyi-institut#ixzz5fj2mh2bC)
- Association of cultural managers. News. Retrieved on April 24, 2019
  from
  [<http://amcult.ru/news/v-seminare-po-proektirovaniju-festivalja-primut-uchastie-25-chastnyh-muzeev>

- Bityatskaya S.I. (1953). *Materialiy po istoriy russkogo
  kollekstionirovaniya*. \[Materials on the history of Russian
  collecting\]. Manuscript department of the State Tretyakov Gallery.
  Fond № 104. Part 2. D. 167. p. 6.

- ICOM Russia News. (2015). *Korporativnye muzei segodnya*. \[Corporate
  Museums Today\]. Muzey, (9), 71-73.

- Kulieva, М. М. (2016). *Muzey kak osobyi socialno-kulturnyi institut*
  \[ Museum as a Special Socio-Cultural Institution\].
  Nauchno-metodicheskiy elektronnyi zhurnal "Kontsept' \[Scientific and
  Methodological Electronic Journal "Concept"\]. Т. 2. (pp.476--480).
  Retrieved on March 14, 2019 from
  [http://ekoncept.ru/2016/46114.html](http://ekoncept.ru/2016/46114.html)

- Lapteva, М.А. (2006). *Muzey kak sotsialnyi institut.
  Sotsialno-filosofskyi analiz \[*Museum as a Social Institution.
  Socio-Philosophical Analysis\]. Ph.D. (Philosophy). Thesis. Retrieved
  on March 14, 2019 from
  <http://cheloveknauka.com/muzey-kak-sotsialnyy-institut#ixzz5fmATmNOa>

- Mairesse, F. (2018). The politics and poetics of Museology. (17-23).
  *ICOFOM Study Series*, 46, Paris.

- Moskvin V. A. (2015). *Musey russkogo zarubezh'y* \[Museum of Russians
  Abroad\]. Muzey, (12), 8.

- Petrunina L.Y. (1991). *Muzey izobrazitelnykh iskusstv kak sotsialnyi
  institut khudozhestvennoy kultury* \[Fine Art Museum as a Social
  Institution of Artistic Culture\]. Ph.D. (Philosophy). Thesis.
  Retrieved on March 14, 2019 from
  <http://cheloveknauka.com/muzey-izobrazitelnyh-iskusstv-kak-sotsialnyy-institut-hudozhestvennoy-kultury>

- Pivnenko А. S. (1990). *Khudozhestvennay zhizn' Khar'kova vo vtoroy
  polovine XIX -- nachale XX veka (do 1917).* \[The artistic life of the
  Kharkov city in the second half of the XIX - began the twentieth
  century (until 1917)\]. Abstract of diss. PhD in art history.
  All-Russian Research Institute of Art Studies. p.12. Russia; Charter.
  (1913)*. Ustav obshzhestva Vereshzhagina. Nikolaev.* \[The Charter of
  the Society of Vereshchagin\]. Nikolaev. \[In Russian\]; Charter.
  (1898). *Ustav obshzhestva lyubiteley iskusstva v gorode Smolensk*.
  \[The charter of the Society of art lovers in the city of Smolensk\].
  Smolensk. \[In Russian\].

- Smith L. (2012). All Heritage is Intangible: Critical Heritage Studies
  and Museums. Amsterdam.

- The Future of Tradition in Museology. (2019). Materials for a
  discussion. ICOFOM, Paris.

- Waterton E., Smith L., Campbell G. (2006). The Utility of Discourse
  Analysis to Heritage Studies: The Burra Charter and Social Inclusion
  // *International Journal of Heritage Studies*. Vol. 12. № 4. P.
  342--346.