---
title: "Experimental Museology, its Principles and Practices: The Creation of the LGBTI+ Memory and Training Center"
authors: [{name: "Silvilene Barros", institution: "Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro – Rio de Janeiro, Brazil"},
{name: "Carolina Zanesi", institution: "Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro – Rio de Janeiro, Brazil"},
{name: "Marina Pinheiro", institution: "Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro – Rio de Janeiro, Brazil"}]
---

In this short paper, we bring together a description of the experience
of students graduating from a museology course and researchers who are
part of the Experimental Museology and Image Group linked to the
postgraduate program in Museology and Heritage of the Federal University
of the State of Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO). In partnership with the
non-governmental organization *Grupo Arco-Íris de Cidadania LGBTI+*
(Rainbow Group of LGBTI+ Citizenship), they created the LGBTI+ Memory
and Training Center in Rio de Janeiro. Our analysis will consider the
recent history of this community-based organization as well as the
concepts that guide the work in progress.

Understanding museums as a "permanent non-profit institution, in the
service of society and its development, open to the public, which
acquires, preserves, investigates, communicates and exposes the material
and immaterial heritage of humanity and its environment for the purpose
of education, study and enjoyment" (ICOM 2007), we consider the role of
museums and museology to be important in safeguarding the history and
memory of all segments of society, particularly those who are
continuously made invisible and silenced, such as the various identity
groups that form the LGBTI+ segment. Museums may work for the
recognition and validation of plural histories and memories,
particularly those connected to trajectories of struggles in contexts of
discrimination and violence, affirmation of rights and citizenship.

The work is founded in some guiding questions: Which aspects determine
the silencing of certain social groups? How can museums and museology
help to safeguard and disseminate heritage rendered invisible? In order
to understand the different social factors that determine the
invisibility of certain minority groups’ stories, we base our reflection
on the concepts of coloniality and the "decolonial turn", adding the
principles of experimental museology as guidelines for the actions
developed.

According to Quijano (2009) coloniality is one of the elements that
integrate the pattern of global capitalist power. It is based on the
imposition of a racial/ethnic classification of the world’s population
as the cornerstone of this pattern of power, acting directly on various
plans, means and dimensions (material or subjective) of daily existence
and societal levels. It is precisely in the fabric of society that power
is established as a network of articulated social relations of
exploitation/domination/conflicts, with the purpose of exercising
control over various means of existence, among which we highlight sex,
its products and species reproduction. This power, therefore, produces
and reinforces a specific and transversal inequality in relation to the
existential dimensions of class, gender and race (Ballestrin, 2013).

> It is specifically in the dimensions of being, knowledge and power
> that coloniality presents itself as the hidden face of modernity.
> (Ballestrin, 2017)

In this sense, the "decolonial turn" created by Nelson Maldonado-Torres
in 2005represents "the movement of theoretical and practical, political
and epistemological resistance to the logic of modernity/coloniality"
(Ballestrin, 2013, p.105)[^1].

The creation of the Memory Center emerged as a counterpoint to the
diagnosis by *Grupo Arco-Íris* (GAI) of the absence of consistent
initiatives to safeguard the memory of the LGBTI Movement in Rio de
Janeiro and the restricted circulation of information about its history.
The GAI was founded on May 21, 1993, in the state capital, and it acts
in defense of LGBTI+ rights on several fronts, with a focus on
citizenship issues, health, combating violence and improving the quality
of life for members of the LGBTI+ community in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

The Brazilian gay rights movement began in the 1960s, when there were
countless struggles that claimed civil rights in Brazil and abroad.
Latin America was going through a period of totalitarian government and
Brazil was dealing with a civil-military dictatorship (1964-1985) that
implemented censorship in several areas. It is in this scenario that the
Brazilian homosexual rights movement was born. Until then, the LGBT
groups gathered their members in sporadic actions, for the purpose of
discussing their specific situations living in a homophobic social
system, but without organizing themselves politically.

Gay activists in the 1970s realized that they could be allies with the
emerging feminist movement against sexism rooted in patriarchy. Feminism
dates its emergence in the country to 1978, a time when the dictatorship
was weakened and countless social movements were getting stronger, which
brought out the debate in society about the rigidity of gender roles and
traditional sexual conventions.

From this panorama, publications and new organized groups that promote
the strengthening of the gay rights movement were created, such as the
*Jornal Lampião da Esquina* (1978), a newspaper created by
intellectuals, artists and activists for the homosexual public, and the
*SOMOS* homosexual affirmation group based in São Paulo and, later, Rio
de Janeiro, propelling the movement into the political and intellectual
sphere. Other groups appear in sequence, increasing the visibility of
this segment of society, seeking to influence political and social
levels to achieve improvements in their living conditions and guarantees
of rights.

However, with the emergence and growth of the HIV epidemic in the
country beginning in 1982, and with the attribution of the disease to
wealthy gays traveling to the United States and Europe, homosexual
groups suffered a tremendous impact. The HIV/AIDS pandemic was marked,
at the beginning, by misinformation, generating more violence and
discrimination against homosexuals, resulting in a wave of homophobia by
part of the society, stimulated by the sensationalist press that called
HIV/AIDS the "gay plague".

In this context, the movement resurfaced and strengthened itself for the
purpose of caring for peers by alerting the community about the disease
and disseminating ideas of prevention in partnership with organizations
focused on combating HIV. Support groups were created to fight against
AIDS, since countless homosexuals died due to the spread of the disease.
In this context, the GAI was born under the name *Grupo Arco-Íris de
Conscientização Homosexual* (Rainbow Group of Homosexual Awareness),
aiming to work on self-esteem, combating violence and acting in the
prevention of HIV/AIDS.

The relevance of the trajectory and work developed by GAI can be
recognized in its direct relationship with the history of the Brazilian
LGBTI+ movement, with repercussions at the international level. GAI is
the founder of the Brazilian Association of Gays, Lesbians, Bisexuals,
Transvestites, Transsexuals and Intersex (ABGLT) and the International
Association of Gays and Lesbians in Latin America and the Caribbean
(ILGALAC), having formed a partnership with the National Alliance
LGBTI+. In addition, it is affiliated with the International Lesbian and
Gay Association (ILGA). The group was also part of the founding of the
Gay Latin Network (a network of gay Latin men, activists for the rights
of LGBT people committed to the global response to HIV), and currently
occupies a seat on the executive board of this council. Currently, GAI
conducts projects such as *Casa Arco-Íris de Cidadania LGBTI+* (Rainbow
House of LGBTI+ Citizenship), offering legal, psychological and social
care for LGBTI+ victims of violence, and the *Escola de Divines*
(Divines School), aimed at training transvestite and transsexual
professionals in the fashion area.

Due to this trajectory of struggles, the initial desire of GAI members
was to create a center for memory, documentation and training on the
LGBTI+ Movement in Rio de Janeiro, aiming to conduct future research and
consultation with various audiences. Thus was born the idea of the
*Centro de Memória e Formação Arco-Íris de Cidadania LGBTI+* (Rainbow
Memory and Training Center for LGBTI+ Citizenship) in Rio de Janeiro, a
space for systematization, analysis and dissemination of the group’s
documentary collection and memory record of LGBTI+ activism.

At the beginning of 2019, as a first stage, a team of seven museology
interns and researchers, a volunteer student of library science and a
museologist, sought theoretical and methodological bases to understand
how to deal with LGBTI+ archives and their particularities. The objects
in the collection reveal the power struggles within activism and expose
memories that exist in both the public and private spheres. We use the
principles of Experimental Museology, a current that emerged in the
1970s and 1980s, and which served as a methodological foundation,
emphasizing the social side of the field. It is possible to identify
other movements for the decolonization of museology and museums, such as
the New Museology, which developed in the 1980s.

The team was divided into working groups with different functions, among
which were the preparation of budgets for the materials needed to create
the Center, spatial organization of the place where the collection was
kept and mapping of the collection through interviews with activists.

The methodology of oral history interviews conducted with GAI
collaborators was one of the main instruments that allowed for the
recognition of the collection and its contexts in the institutional
memory of GAI and the LGBTI+ movement. Activists were also asked how
they would like the movement’s memory to be portrayed in a museum,
which was important in identifying the most appropriate approach for the
future of the Memory Center.

In the next stage, actions were directed to the inventory of the
collection, seeking to have more insight into the available documents. A
process to identify and sanitize the collection and relocate it to more
suitable packaging was also started. The information on the performed
processes and the inventory records of the objects are now stored in
digital media and are divided by type. Currently, 10,073 items have been
inventoried and can be consulted.

The team is now preparing the draft of the museological plan of the
Memory and Formation Center, which will be discussed and written with
the community, based on the controlled vocabulary study and testing of
catalogs, in order to meet the specificities of the collection.

From this experience we can see that the recovery and organization of
LGBTI+ movement testimonies in Rio, in addition to bringing the LGBTI+
community closer to its history, has the potential to support the
struggle for human rights. In addition, safeguarding the collection
gathered by the GAI for 27 years of existence and (re)existence will
help in understanding the actors of the community and their empowerment,
since understanding the history of the group to which they belong
impacts an effective search for rights as well as a liberation from the
oppression felt in their bodies, throughout life, from LGBTIphobia.

## References

- Andreoni, R. (2011). Museu, Comunicação e Poder. *Intratextos*, 3(1),
  pp.5.
- Ballestrini, L. (maio-agosto, 2013). América Latina e o giro
  decolonial. *Revista Brasileira de Ciências Políticas,* (11), (pp
  89-117) pp. 100. 

- Ballestrini, L. (2017).  Modernidade/Colonialidade sem
  "Imperialidade"? O elo perdido do giro decolonial. *DADOS - Revista de
  Ciências Sociais*, 60(2), (pp. 505 -- 540). pp 510. 

- Green, J. (1999). *Além do Carnaval:* A homossexualidade Masculina do
  Brasil no século XX*.* São Paulo, Brazil: Editora UNESP

- Green, J. (2015). Mais Amor e Mais Tesão: A construção de um movimento
  brasileiro de Gays, Lésbicas e Travestis*. Caderno Pagu,* 15, (pp.
  271- 296) pp.284-286.

- Quijano, A. (2009). Colonialidade do Poder e Classificação Social. in
  S.B. Souza, & M.M Paula (Orgs), *Epistemologias do Sul: Edições
  Almedina, CES*. (pp.73-117). Coimbra, Portugal.

[^1]: Ballestrin (2013) analyzes the production of the research program Modernity/Coloniality (created in 1998) and references Maldonado-Torres as creator of the concept.
