---
title: "All My Relations: (Re)Imagined Communities and Indigenous Peoples"
authors: [{name:"Karine Duhamel, PhD", institution: "Canadian Museum for Human Rights – Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada"}]
---

In Canada, as in other countries with a colonial origin, museums have
participated in the construction of a collective national identity
through curated versions of the past and of the present which often
silence or minimize Indigenous Peoples. Drawing on the work of Benedict
Anderson (1983), Canadians, as part of an "imagined community", have
consciously avoided narratives that would position Indigenous Peoples as
sovereign peoples, or else they have propagated a version of the
settler’s historical record that has painted Indigenous communities as
participants in the building of Canada. This kind of epistemological
structure is problematic for Nations and communities who already have,
and who have had since time immemorial, their own identity as peoples.
The reductionist framework imposed by the erasure of these histories,
particularly within museums, is an impediment to the pursuit of true
decolonization based in Indigenous principles, practices and ways of
knowing.

Even more troubling, a reductionist view of Indigenous histories has
concrete implications for museum policy. Museological approaches to
decolonization in Canada, where they exist, have largely focused on
efforts to change policies and to update content to reflect an awareness
and a sensitivity to Indigenous histories as a part of a greater
national and Canada-centric whole. In some cases, this has meant the
inclusion of new representatives on Museum boards or in consultative
capacities. In other cases, this has meant the hiring of Indigenous
people within Museums to help share these important perspectives.
Regardless of the mechanisms, the policies and practices related to
decolonization have largely focused on the mechanisms of this work
rather than its undergirding principles. In other words, we have largely
failed, as institutions, to think big.

How can institutions articulate and transform themselves without
applying a pan-Indigenous lens that subsumes key differences in protocol
and perspective between diverse communities? As a curator and
researcher, this question is central to my work at the Canadian Museum
for Human Rights (CMHR) and raises important issues related not only to
what we exhibit, but also to the process through which we create content
and programming. It is also reflective of my own identity as an
Indigenous person working within a national institution.

## All my relations

In Lakota or Ojibway communities, this phrase is often used within the
context of a sharing circle, or at the end of a prayer. It represents an
acknowledgement of our interconnectedness and the respect we hold for
each other.

All my relations - these are simple words, but the meaning they carry is
significant. They represent the weight of the past and the possibility
of the future, and they carry with them important values that have
assisted Indigenous people in building families, communities and Nations
since time immemorial.

In *Embers* (2016), Richard Wagamese discusses the phrase "All my
relations". All my relations, he writes "points to the truth that we are
all related, that we are all connected, that we all belong to each
other" (p.34). Within this, as he explains, the most salient concept is
the word "all", and that this relationship includes:

> Not just those who look like me, sing like me, dance like me, speak
> like me, pray like me or behave like me. ALL my relations. That means
> every person, just as it means every rock, mineral, blade of grass,
> and creature. We live because everything else does. (p.34)

As Wagamese asserts, the central idea of this kind of thinking is
relational. This relational space represents an important nexus around
which we might rethink our ways of relating to one another and even how
museums may conceive of relating to the histories and contemporary
perspectives of Indigenous peoples, whether First Nations, Métis or
Inuit.

In his writing about Indigenous--settler relations, Cree researcher
Willie Ermine discusses relationships as "spaces of engagement" to
emphasize the opportunities that exist within relationships to work out
the similarities and differences between the various ways of knowing
that may be held by those involved. When we consider relationships as
spaces of engagement, Ermine (1995, p. 195) explains that we pay
attention to the words, actions, and behaviours that exist on the
surface. These words, actions, and behaviours, however, also tell us
something about the attitudes, beliefs, and contexts that run below the
surface and that function as a "deeper level force" in shaping the ways
of knowing and being that may be present in relationships.

Confronting the deeper level forces at work within the museum field is a
critical task that involves looking at all aspects of museum work. The
underlying values that this work takes on should, in the true spirit of
decolonization, reflect a new way of approaching collections, content
and education. The values deployed when working with and alongside
Indigenous people need to reflect Indigenous ways of knowing about the
world and about their histories.

At the CMHR in Winnipeg, Manitoba, curatorial and programming practices
work to create an ethical space of engagement with Indigenous
communities and individuals based in important foundational values.
These include respect, reciprocity and interconnectedness.

Respect means honouring and respecting other living beings. Respect
extends beyond humans to animals and other living elements in the world.
It means acknowledging the contributions that each living thing makes to
sustain life or to contribute to a good life, both individually and
collectively.

Reciprocity is about give and take. When a relationship is reciprocal,
both sides actively participate in giving what is needed and taking what
is needed. This means that in everything, there is an exchange of ideas,
and one idea or gift leads to another. It creates rights and obligations
for people toward each other.

Interconnectedness is the idea that the rights of individuals and of the
collective are connected to rights of the land, water, animals, spirits,
and all living things, including other communities or Nations.
Interconnectedness recognizes that everything and everyone has purpose
and that each is worthy of respect and holds a place within the circle
of life.

The Museum’s permanent galleries are based on these principles, which
are articulated in key practices such as community collaboration and
co-curation, guest curation, the prioritization of Indigenous
perspectives and the minimization of Museum voice, and, the presentation
of human and Indigenous rights violations as shared history. Recognizing
that decolonization approaches are by nature, dynamic, subsequent
projects have also worked to create a deeper space of engagement based
on the values of respect, reciprocity and interconnectedness. These
projects include Rights of Passage, an exhibition I curated that
employed exciting new methodologies for story-telling and artifact
selection.[^1]

Ongoing work also includes the development of the relationship around
the Witness Blanket, an art installation by Carey Newman (Kwakwak’awakw
and Coast Salish), which has become part of the permanent collection of
the Canadian Museum for Human Rights. The Witness Blanket honours the
thousands of children who were forced into the Indian residential school
system in Canada. It is a cedar "blanket," woven with over 800 pieces of
Indian residential school history. These contributions were donated by
residential school survivors and their families, band offices,
friendship centres and governments. Other items were reclaimed from
former residential school sites. The contributions include letters,
photos, stories, books, clothing, art and fragments of buildings.

The exhibition of the Witness Blanket is directed in collaboration with
the artist and is based upon the principles of respect, reciprocity and
interconnectedness. But beyond what the public sees, and in terms of the
care and stewardship of the Blanket, the relationship with the artist
and with the installation is also unique.

On October 16, 2019, a historic agreement between Carey Newman and the
CMHR was finalized through traditional ceremony at Kumugwe, the K’ómoks
First Nation Bighouse on Vancouver Island. In an unprecedented process,
Kwakwaka’wakw traditions and governance and Western contract law came
together to form the basis of a permanent relationship, vesting rights
with the artwork itself as a legal entity that carries the stories of
the survivors.

The ceremony, held near Newman’s traditional territory, was facilitated
by chief and spiritual leader Wedlidi Speck, head of the Gixsam namima
(clan) of the Kwagul people. A song, dance and the ancestors’ mask
marked the importance of the ceremony, which also included Carey Newman
and CMHR president and CEO John Young each stating their purpose and
intentions for the stewardship of The Witness Blanket. Witnesses from
the Kwakaka’wakw community, youth, Elders and others with connections to
the project, then reflected on their responsibilities as part of this
relationship. The parties celebrated with a feast, acknowledging the
gift of the agreement and the deep connection that has been forged. As
Carey Newman expressed, in the aftermath of the ceremony, "Through
spoken words and shared memory, we can express our commitment in ways
that transcend written contracts --- how we feel, our hopes and our
goals for this agreement and our relationship as collaborative stewards
of the Blanket and survivors’ stories it holds."

For the CMHR, our responsibilities to the agreement include the care of
the Blanket for future generations. Toward this goal, the Museum has
begun restoration work on the installation in preparation for an
upcoming exhibition project that will represent the Blanket’s second
exhibition at the CMHR.

Within the context of the Witness Blanket, as well as other notable
projects including Rights of Passage, Indigenous epistemologies have
been central to the development of curatorial practices and educational
programs at the CMHR. Relationships and Indigenous principles
surrounding partnership as the basis of a new or different kind of
museology take to heart the need to create ethical spaces of engagement
and to acknowledge the history and legacy of museums as institutions
that have traditionally served to minimize or to amalgamate Indigenous
histories within a larger umbrella of the "national" story of Canada.
Recognizing and atoning for the ways in which this relationship has
harmed Indigenous communities and Nations is in fact the central animus
of decolonization practices, which should serve not only to modify what
museums do, but to completely transform them.

Engaging in critical dialogue about the past and future of how
museological practices serve Indigenous people, communities and Nations
means daring to think bigger and more boldly. How museums envision a
pathway focused on decolonization rests in engaging Indigenous
principles of relationship-building and responsibility -- not simply a
change in policy.

And so, to return to the beginning, *All my relations*. This is a
principle, it is a prayer, it is a hope for the reinvention of the ways
within which institutions operate. As Wagamese (2016) maintains, "It’s
our saving grace in the end" (p.34).

## References

- Anderson, B. (1983). *Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin
  and Spread of Nationalism*. London: Verso.
- Ermine, W. (2007). "The Ethical Space of Engagement." *Indigenous Law
  Journal,* 6 (1), 193-203.

- Wagamese, R. (2016). *Embers: One Ojibway’s Mediations*. Madeira Park,
  BC: Douglas McIntyre Ltd.

[^1]: For more on this, see the article "Kanata/Canada: Re-storying Canada 150 at the Canadian Museum for Human Rights," *Journal of the Canadian Historical Association 2017*, New Series, Vol. 28, No.1, pp. 217-247.
