---
title: "Decolonizing a Colonizer’s Tool"
authors: [{name:"Leon Perelson Bellinha", institution:"Federal University of the State of Rio de Janeiro – Rio de Janeiro, Brazil"}]
---

In order to discuss the decolonization of museology, we must understand
what comes with these two words. Museology is the science or practice of
organizing, arranging, and managing museums. And what are museums?
Currently, the International Council of Museums’ official definition
states that a museum is a "non-profit, permanent institution in the
service of society and its development, open to the public, which
acquires, conserves, researches, communicates and exhibits the tangible
and intangible heritage of humanity and its environment for the purposes
of education, study and enjoyment". However, this definition can change
-- and it already has. By focusing on the social history of museums, I
wish to uncover the changing roles of the institution and the issues
hindering the process of decolonization.

Firstly, to properly grasp the meaning of decolonization, we need to
acknowledge how colonization is still present in modern society. When
the colonizers plundered everything they could, the colonies were forced
to endure all the pain to prevent further attacks. Consequently, these
two societies became unquestionably entangled. This can be most notably
identified within the social realm of former colonies’ everyday life,
such as the dominant language spoken.

Nonetheless, museologists usually look at these societies as two
different and separate ones instead of two different ones with a common
past, which translates itself in the present as an intrinsic bind
between two countries. It is unfair to treat those countries as the
colonizers are treated since they never became fully postcolonial
because the colonizers never left their countries to create themselves
organically. There are countries younger than fifty years old (e.g.
Angola (independent since 1975), Djibouti (independent since 1977), and
Micronesia (independent since 1986)). Moreover, the smaller societies
(indigenous or religious) inside a country are also not respected as
their own because they are seen as a figment of others.

As a result, the museal field continuously perpetuates the myth of a
single homogeneous society within a given former colony, when they
should be in fact, paving the way towards decolonization. But what
exactly does this path entail and how is it possible for museums to put
this into practice? In order to find the answers to these questions, it
is necessary to address the roots of this issue: the creation of the
first museums and the birth of a new field of study.

It is vital to understand the context behind the process of museum
creation. Questions arise regarding how collections were acquired and
consequently how they were and still are displayed, and how the wording
of texts affects public perception. Where were these museums built, what
was their purpose? The answers to these questions might be obvious to
museologists, but how this relates to present-day museums and how to fix
the problem is not obvious at all.

A museum is a place to try to engage in critical dialogues regarding the
past and future of communities and nations, trying to understand their
complex histories and learn from the mistakes made throughout their
existence. History might be dark and ethically dubious at times, but all
must engage with it, nevertheless. Undertaking such a process requires
us to understand the root of the issues faced in the field of museum
studies. It is at the beginning of the museum’s history that the problem
started, when the world was still largely under colonial rule, and
collectors mostly acquired objects by questionable means.

Although objects were at times also bought by or gifted to colonial
forces, they were most commonly simply claimed and taken. Even when
pieces were legally acquired, the colonized participated out of fear,
hoping to avoid further exploitation. Furthermore, it is important to
talk about how these are then displayed in museums. Every part of the
museography matters, but the one that influences the most on people’s
views on some object or some population is the expography. Even the
words chosen to explain what an object is can be a consequence of
colonization.

For instance, calling an object "primitive" instead of "ancient" or
"old" can influence the public’s perception of the object. The first
term is usually used in a pejorative or derisive connotation, so the
public will perceive the object and the people that used it as simple,
unsophisticated and less worthy than Europeans. Whereas the second is
usually said more neutrally, as it was necessary at some time but not
anymore, thus making the public perceive it as an object that once was
important but it stopped and became "classic" making it sound
remarkable. Lastly, the third can be used in any way since it is a
completely neutral term not really making an impact on perception, the
rest of the text being the explanation needed and the public will have
no pre-made concepts about an object based on a word.

In the beginning of the 20^th^ century, the archaeologist Leonard
Woolley discovered the oldest place to be considered a museum, the
Enningaldi-Nanna’s museum, built by a Babylonian princess in 530 BCE and
devoted to Mesopotamian antiquities. The first modern museums were
formed by the private collections of wealthy families, people, and
institutions, among others. These so-called \"wonder rooms" or "cabinets
of curiosities’’, were found to display almost anything ranging from
art and tools to entire specimens of exotic fauna and flora. Modern
museums, however, started to appear in Europe in the late 15^th^ to
early 16^th^ centuries and consisted mainly of European art.
Furthermore, early museums, which preceded the term itself,
consequently, museums and the field of studies created thereafter were
born from and perpetuated a Eurocentric worldview.

When diving even further into the history of museums, it is possible to
come to the conclusion about the purpose of early modern museums:
testament of power. Being able to afford to go traveling or to buy art
is and has always been something that most cannot do. Ergo, all to whom
this was a possibility and ultimately displayed their collections were
members of the upper class or connected to powerful institutions. The
most powerful members of society, such as the nobility, were exclusively
the ones who could afford to travel and bring back souvenirs to add to
their collections and put them in museums. Consequently, when they
described the musealia, they would inevitably describe it
underestimating the people who used it.

Even though social history museums eventually became places to learn,
study, and research cultures erstwhile unknown to Europeans, museology
still is a very classist and Eurocentric field. This is slowly changing
as the field starts to place more value upon local cultures. Museums in
France to New Zealand and Brazil are paving the way towards
decolonization. The process of decolonizing is hard and can be damaging
to museums in Europe, but is a path that must be followed to correct the
mistakes of the past and try to make amends with societies that were
exploited. This process will depend on two factors, however: 1) the
colonizer or colonized country 2) The reality of settlement and
exploitation during colonization.

In different countries, different types of decolonization are necessary.
What is common in all ways to decolonize the museum is the goal: start
engaging in a critical dialogue about the past and future of the nations
and communities involved. The easiest way to decolonize the museums is
that the ex-colonizers should simply give back what has come to their
hands through morally questionable actions. Nevertheless, that is not
easy per se; it is only the most easily achievable goal. One action and
most of the issues that are reminiscent of colonization are resolved.
However, this is not a magical solution and it is also not new. All
around the globe, for some time, the museal field have been discussing
this. The biggest problems that were brought to light because of this
debate are: 1) the museums in the countries that would receive the
objects may not have the infrastructure to take care of them. 2) The
museums that are returning the objects would lose a big part of their
collections, causing a defective teaching potential.

For the first problem, the difficulty is that there is not one way to
handle these cases. Every case must be treated as unique. Furthermore,
it is usually a battle of egos: both sides judge themselves more fit
than the other to have the object in question. Many factors must be
taken into account, such as the importance of the object (for both the
giver and receiver); the ability of the museum to take care of the
object; the historical issue (determining which objects fit in the
category of "must be returned"). This battle can be settled through
legal action in court, in a meeting between the two museum directors or
another way. The most used argument to defend that something should stay
where they are is the fact that the Europeans museums usually deem third
world country museums unfit. That can be true, but even when it is not,
they do not want to let go of the object because of its value to the
museum. The solution should always be in favor of the object. When the
museum is unable to perform all the preservation measures, they should
not have the object.

The second problem will only appear after the first one is dealt with
and quite easily solved. The giver can replicate the objects given -- if
the receiver agrees -- not to damage the teaching potential for the
museum. If the receiver does not agree that the giver can replicate the
object, that has to be respected.

When talking about the museums in colonized countries, it is harder to
decolonize, because the decolonization of their museums lies also in the
decolonization of the colonizer museums. A better way to decolonize the
museal field in colonized countries is to create museums or expositions
that talk about colonization. Art curator and critic Robert Leonard
(2006) believes that:

> Social history museums aspire to tell stories. Which is odd, because
> they tell stories rather badly compared to books or movies, which can
> be gripping and immersive.

This is true up to a point in the former colonies because they lack
material history that was stolen from them when they were colonized. The
problem in most of the former colonies is that visiting museums is an
uncommon habit because museums are seen as boring places meant for the
elite. So not only decolonizing the museal field is needed, but also
destigmatizing it in certain places. One clear example that only
decolonization is not very effective is the Indigenous Museum in Rio de
Janeiro, which closed due to a lack of visitors. On another note, good
examples of functioning decolonization are the different exhibitions
(e.g. Slice of Heaven and a community exhibition about the Scottish
migrants) at the Te Papa Museum, in Wellington, New Zealand. The
difference between the two countries that made something work on one
side and not in the other is the past: New Zealand was a settlement
colony while Brazil was an exploitation colony.

## References

- Leonard, Robert, (2006). ’Gift Horse’ in Lynne Seear (ed).
  Asia-Pacific Triennial of Contemporary Art, Brisbane: Queensland Art.
- Ross, K. (2013). Slice of heaven: 20th Century Aotearoa: Biculturalism
  and Social History at the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa.
  *Aboriginal policy studies*, 2(2), 115-127.

- *The world’s oldest museums.* (2014, October 29). *Museums.EU.*
  Retrieved April 15, 2019 from
  https://museums.eu/highlight/details/105317/the-worlds-oldest-museums

- Ross, K. (2007). "Materialising Social History in Museums." Te Ara:
  Journal of Museums Aotearoa 32 (1--2): 2--5.