---
title: "Negotiating the Decolonisation of National Museums in Zimbabwe"
authors: [{name:"Simbarashe Shadreck Chitima", institution:"Midlands State University-Gweru, Zimbabwe"}]
---

## Abstract

This study examines the success of decolonisation efforts employed by
national museums. The study employed qualitative research with a
research population of 740 participants drawn from museum personnel and
local communities including members from the black, coloured and white
community. It is revealed that decolonisation efforts such as renaming
museums and refocusing displays is mock and inadequate. It is concluded
that there is a need for political will to decolonise the mental
frameworks, exhibitions and narratives, interpretations, educational
philosophies and methods of content delivery.

## Introduction

Museums in Zimbabwe are a colonial inheritance. Currently, 40 years
after independence, museums are viewed by Zimbabweans as still
subscribing to Occidentalism. This study examined the success of
decoloniality efforts expended by national museums in Zimbabwe. The
major research questions probed by the study are: Which decoloniality
efforts have been initiated by museums? What do museum stakeholders
think constitute a decolonised museum? The aim of the study is to
provide a decoloniality framework for museums.

## Methodology

The study employed qualitative research and phenomenology research
design. The research population totalled 740 participants drawn from
museum personnel, university lecturers, school teachers and members of
the public, some of whom represented distinct local communities and the
white as well as coloured communities in Zimbabwe. Research instruments
used include interviews, observations and focus group discussions. The
study was undertaken from 2016 to 2019 at five national museums in
Zimbabwe.

## Results

There are few efforts being employed in the decolonisation of museums
and some of the initiatives include renaming museums, refocusing
displays, improving accessibility and working with local communities.
National museums were renamed in 1982 where the Rhodesian Museum became
the Natural History museum, the Queen Victoria the Zimbabwe Museum of
Human Sciences (ZMHS), the Umtali Museum the National Museum of
Transport and Antiquities (NMTA), the Midlands Museum the Zimbabwe
Military Museum (ZMM) and the Great Zimbabwe monument was declared a
world heritage site in 1986. Secondly, the ZMM has refocused some
displays in the Zimbabwe Military History and the Zimbabwe Republic
Police galleries. The NMTA has changed the Beit exhibition and added a
display case in the Boultbee exhibition to depict the second liberation
struggle. The ZMHS has refocused the Stone Age and Iron Age exhibitions,
made additional displays of the Shona Village and material culture as
well as the rock art in Zimbabwe. The NHM has renamed and refocused the
Hall of Chiefs, included a live snake exhibition and added a mine shaft
model in the geology gallery. The NHM has also included a coelacanth
rare fish display, added in the mammalogy gallery a display case of
hippos in the wetland and wildlife within the wet as well as dry
seasons. The site museum at the GZWHS contain exhibitions created from
the late 1980s to 2000.

The government has also given equal employment opportunities to all
Zimbabweans which was unheard of during the colonial period. Even access
to museums has been widened. Indigenous cultures in Zimbabwe have
demanded from the government to repatriate stolen cultural material and
so an effort was made for the repatriation of the Mkwati stick and some
of Zimbabwe birds. Museums have also engaged local communities in the
management of cultural sites through the Adopt 'A' site educational
programme. Areas cited by participants to be decolonised include: museum
architecture, exhibitions and narratives, mind-set and curatorial
democracy, educational philosophy, language and methods of content
delivery. It has been revealed that museum architectural design is
viewed as a European model. Suggestions are that museum architecture
should reflect the designs on Zimbabwe type dry-stone or on Shona or
Ndebele villages. Museum exhibitions and narratives are also considered
colonial. It was suggested that exhibitions and narratives should be
reconstituted since these were done during the colonial period. White
community participants expressed that although they pity colonialism,
the decolonisation of museum narratives should be balanced so that the
white population living in Zimbabwe is not seen as evil which could
contribute to segregation and xenophobia. The coloured community
indicated that they felt excluded from museums as there were no
representations or content that related to them. It was gathered that
instead of museums continuing to embrace colonial permanent exhibitions,
they could change and talk about topical issues affecting society. For
example, it was indicated that in 2020 the world, including Zimbabweans,
were battling to contain the Corona Virus (Corvid 19). It is also
established that the majority of permanent exhibitions in Zimbabwe are
choked with scientific language and jargon comprehendible only by a few.
It is strongly felt that museums should also make use of indigenous
languages in their interpretations.

## Discussion

Decolonisation is a process where museums strive to repeal colonial or
neo-colonial iconography, names, exhibitions, narratives,
interpretations, educational frameworks and methods of content delivery.
Decolonisation is to do away with a Western museology that embraces
colonial worldviews of being, power and knowledge production
(Ndlovu-Gatsheni, 2013; Maldonado-Torres, 2011). Decolonisation of
museums is a negotiated process and not an instant one time project.
There is need for strategies and principles (policy or action plans) of
operations because they help capture the terms and references and
operational guidelines of stakeholders to avoid conflicts.
Decolonisation of museums is not a one man band undertaking but require
all relevant stakeholders in order to avoid the former coloniser being
colonised or further seclusion of politically weak smaller groups.
Museums may assemble a decolonisation team constituted by local
communities, government agents and museum personnel. The third step is
to conduct a decolonisation audit which helps identify areas that
require to be decolonised. The areas that need to be decolonised differ
from one museum to the other. A number of areas have been suggested in
the case of Zimbabwe that need to be decolonised such as the
iconography, museum architecture, mental framework of staff, exhibitions
and narratives, interpretations, educational philosophy and method of
content delivery. Although the government in Zimbabwe renamed museums
the majority of permanent exhibitions, narratives and interpretations as
well as conduct remain colonial. The philosophy grounding museum
education service needs to be re-examined in Zimbabwe. Mbembe (2015)
points out that there is something wrong if museums continue to provide
educational content designed to meet the needs of the colonialist in the
post-colonial era. Museums still use English, scientific language and
jargon as the dominant mode of communication on captions and guided
tours and these need to be decolonised. Chipangura (2014) recommended
the use of diverse indigenous languages like Shona, Ndebele, Tonga,
Nambya, Chewa, Kalanga, Shangani, Sotho, Venda and Xhosa. It is a known
fact that pupils learn effectively through their first languages (Gomba,
2017).

Decolonisation of museums should also touch on the methods of content
delivery. Guided tours and study sheets promote the Pedagogy of the
Oppressed (Freire, 1970) where the museum visitor is reduced to passive
recipient of information, needs to be repealed. They are other active
methods of making visitors, including students, take ownership of their
museum experience and these are not limited to role playing, games,
drama, song and dance, folk lore, music and interactives. Decolonising
the museum is not an instant happening. As audiences continue to change,
museums will be required to constantly review themselves. New audiences
will have new expectations and needs, hence the need for museums to
review and conduct decolonisation audits time and again.

## Conclusion

Decolonisation of cultural institutions is a negotiated process that
require the participation of all relevant stakeholders the museum serve.
National museums in Zimbabwe still live in a colonial shell and
exhibitions embrace the Western Museology. It is concluded that
Zimbabwean museums still remain colonial settings that are failing to
transform themselves to reflect and serve the current communities. There
is need therefore, to involve all Zimbabweans, black, white and
coloured, in defining and negotiating histories, narratives and cultural
heritage. Decolonisation of museums should touch on the museum
architecture, mind-set, exhibitions and narratives, interpretations,
educational philosophy, language and methods of content delivery.

## References

- Chipangura, N. (2014). *Rethinking the practice of collecting and
  displaying Ethnographic objects at Mutare Museum*. In Omar, R.,
  Ndhlovu, B., Gibson, L., & Vawda, S. (eds), *Museums and the Idea of
  Historical progress*, Cape Town, Iziko Museums Publications, pp
  189-203.
- Freire, P. (1970). *Pedagogy of the Oppressed*. New York: The Seabury
  Press.

- Gomba, C. (2017). Post-colonial theory in Zimbabwe’s education system:
  Headmasters’ views. *International Journal of Research Studies in
  Education*, Volume 7 Number 1, pp77-88.

- Maldonado-Torres, N. (2011). Thinking through the decolonial turn:
  Post-continental interventions in theory, philosophy, and
  critique---an introduction. Transmodernity: *Journal of Peripheral
  Cultural Production of the Luso-Hispanic World*, 1(2), 1-28.

- Mbembe, A. (2015). *Decolonizing knowledge and the question of the
  archive*. Retrieved from
  [[http://wiser.wits.ac.za/system/files/Achille]{.ul}](http://wiser.wits.ac.za/system/files/Achille).

- Ndlovu-Gatsheni, S. J. (2013). "Why Decoloniality in the 21^st^
  Century?" *Thinker*, Volume 48, pp 10-15.